<h2><a href="#C.PREFACE">PREFACE.</a></h2>
<p>
<span class="sc">The</span> present work is a modest effort to reproduce approximately, in modern
measures, the venerable epic, Beowulf. <i>Approximately</i>, I repeat; for a very
close reproduction of Anglo-Saxon verse would, to a large extent, be prose to
a modern ear.
</p>
<p>
The Heyne-Socin text and glossary have been closely followed. Occasionally
a deviation has been made, but always for what seemed good and sufficient
reason. The translator does not aim to be an editor. Once in a while, however,
he has added a conjecture of his own to the emendations quoted from
the criticisms of other students of the poem.
</p>
<p>
This work is addressed to two classes of readers. From both of these alike
the translator begs sympathy and co-operation. The Anglo-Saxon scholar he
hopes to please by adhering faithfully to the original. The student of English
literature he aims to interest by giving him, in modern garb, the most ancient
epic of our race. This is a bold and venturesome undertaking; and yet there
must be some students of the Teutonic past willing to follow even a daring
guide, if they may read in modern phrases of the sorrows of Hrothgar, of the
prowess of Beowulf, and of the feelings that stirred the hearts of our forefathers
in their primeval homes.
</p>
<p>
In order to please the larger class of readers, a regular cadence has been
used, a measure which, while retaining the essential characteristics of the original,
permits the reader to see ahead of him in reading.
</p>
<p>
Perhaps every Anglo-Saxon scholar has his own theory as to how Beowulf
should be translated. Some have given us prose versions of what we believe
to be a great poem. Is it any reflection on our honored Kemble and Arnold
to say that their translations fail to show a layman that Beowulf is justly called
our first <i>epic</i>? Of those translators who have used verse, several have written
from what would seem a mistaken point of view. Is it proper, for instance,
that the grave and solemn speeches of Beowulf and Hrothgar be put in ballad
measures, tripping lightly and airily along? Or, again, is it fitting that the
rough martial music of Anglo-Saxon verse be interpreted to us in the smooth
measures of modern blank verse? Do we hear what has been beautifully called
“the clanging tread of a warrior in mail”?
</p>
<p>
Of all English translations of Beowulf, that of Professor Garnett alone
gives any adequate idea of the chief characteristics of this great Teutonic
epic.
</p>
<p>
The measure used in the present translation is believed to be as near a
reproduction of the original as modern English affords. The cadences closely
resemble those used by Browning in some of his most striking poems. The
four stresses of the Anglo-Saxon verse are retained, and as much thesis and
anacrusis is allowed as is consistent with a regular cadence. Alliteration has
been used to a large extent; but it was thought that modern ears would hardly
tolerate it on every line. End-rhyme has been used occasionally; internal
rhyme, sporadically. Both have some warrant in Anglo-Saxon poetry. (For
end-rhyme, see <a href="#L.I.53">1 <span class="smaller">53</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.54">1 <span class="smaller">54</span></a>; for internal rhyme, <a href="#L.II.21">2 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>, <a href="#L.VI.40">6 <span class="smaller">40</span></a>.)
</p>
<p>
What Gummere<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#PREFACE.FNDEF.1" id="PREFACE.FNREF.1" title="Handbook of Poetics, page 175, 1st edition.">1</a></sup> calls the “rime-giver” has been studiously kept; <i>viz.</i>, the
first accented syllable in the second half-verse always carries the alliteration;
and the last accented syllable alliterates only sporadically. Alternate alliteration
is occasionally used as in the original. (See <a href="#L.VII.61">7 <span class="smaller">61</span></a>, <a href="#L.VIII.5">8 <span class="smaller">5</span></a>.)
</p>
<p>
No two accented syllables have been brought together, except occasionally
after a cæsural pause. (See <a href="#L.II.19">2 <span class="smaller">19</span></a> and <a href="#L.XII.1">12 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>.)
Or, scientifically speaking, Sievers’s
C type has been avoided as not consonant with the plan of translation. Several
of his types, however, constantly occur; <i>e.g.</i> A and a variant
(/ x | / x) (/ x x | / x);
B and a variant (x / | x / ) (x x / | x / ); a variant of D (/ x | / x x);
E (/ x x | / ). Anacrusis gives further variety to the types used in the translation.
</p>
<p>
The parallelisms of the original have been faithfully preserved. (<i>E.g.</i>, <a href="#L.I.16">1 <span class="smaller">16</span></a>
and <a href="#L.I.17">1 <span class="smaller">17</span></a>: “Lord” and “Wielder of Glory”; <a href="#L.I.30">1 <span class="smaller">30</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.31">1 <span class="smaller">31</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.32">1 <span class="smaller">32</span></a>; <a href="#L.II.12">2 <span class="smaller">12</span></a> and <a href="#L.II.13">2 <span class="smaller">13</span></a>;
<a href="#L.II.27">2 <span class="smaller">27</span></a> and <a href="#L.II.28">2 <span class="smaller">28</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.5">3 <span class="smaller">5</span></a> and <a href="#L.III.6">3 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>.) Occasionally, some loss has been sustained; but,
on the other hand, a gain has here and there been made.
</p>
<p>
The effort has been made to give a decided flavor of archaism to the translation.
All words not in keeping with the spirit of the poem have been
avoided. Again, though many archaic words have been used, there are none,
it is believed, which are not found in standard modern poetry.
</p>
<p>
With these preliminary remarks, it will not be amiss to give an outline of
the story of the poem.
</p>
<h2><i>THE STORY.</i></h2>
<p>
<i>Hrothgar, king of the Danes, or Scyldings, builds a great mead-hall, or
palace, in which he hopes to feast his liegemen and to give them presents. The
joy of king and retainers is, however, of short duration. Grendel, the monster,
is seized with hateful jealousy. He cannot brook the sounds of joyance that
reach him down in his fen-dwelling near the hall. Oft and anon he goes to
the joyous building, bent on direful mischief. Thane after thane is ruthlessly
carried off and devoured, while no one is found strong enough and bold enough
to cope with the monster. For twelve years he persecutes Hrothgar and his
vassals.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Over sea, a day’s voyage off, Beowulf, of the Geats, nephew of Higelac,
king of the Geats, hears of Grendel’s doings and of Hrothgar’s misery. He
resolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king. With fourteen
chosen companions, he sets sail for Dane-land. Reaching that country, he soon
persuades Hrothgar of his ability to help him. The hours that elapse before
night are spent in beer-drinking and conversation. When Hrothgar’s bedtime
comes he leaves the hall in charge of Beowulf, telling him that never before has
he given to another the absolute wardship of his palace. All retire to rest,
Beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Grendel comes, the great march-stepper, bearing God’s anger. He seizes
and kills one of the sleeping warriors. Then he advances towards Beowulf.
A fierce and desperate hand-to-hand struggle ensues. No arms are used, both
combatants trusting to strength and hand-grip. Beowulf tears Grendel’s
shoulder from its socket, and the monster retreats to his den, howling and
yelling with agony and fury. The wound is fatal.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>The next morning, at early dawn, warriors in numbers flock to the hall
Heorot, to hear the news. Joy is boundless. Glee runs high. Hrothgar and
his retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Grendel’s mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death. She
is furious and raging. While Beowulf is sleeping in a room somewhat apart
from the quarters of the other warriors, she seizes one of Hrothgar’s favorite
counsellors, and carries him off and devours him. Beowulf is called. Determined
to leave Heorot entirely purified, he arms himself, and goes down to look
for the female monster. After traveling through the waters many hours, he
meets her near the sea-bottom. She drags him to her den. There he sees
Grendel lying dead. After a desperate and almost fatal struggle with the
woman, he slays her, and swims upward in triumph, taking with him Grendel’s
head.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Joy is renewed at Heorot. Congratulations crowd upon the victor.
Hrothgar literally pours treasures into the lap of Beowulf; and it is agreed
among the vassals of the king that Beowulf will be their next liegelord.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Beowulf leaves Dane-land. Hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>When the hero arrives in his own land, Higelac treats him as a distinguished
guest. He is the hero of the hour.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Beowulf subsequently becomes king of his own people, the Geats. After he
has been ruling for fifty years, his own neighborhood is wofully harried by a
fire-spewing dragon. Beowulf determines to kill him. In the ensuing struggle
both Beowulf and the dragon are slain. The grief of the Geats is inexpressible.
They determine, however, to leave nothing undone to honor the memory
of their lord. A great funeral-pyre is built, and his body is burnt. Then a
memorial-barrow is made, visible from a great distance, that sailors afar may
be constantly reminded of the prowess of the national hero of Geatland.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>The poem closes with a glowing tribute to his bravery, his gentleness, his
goodness of heart, and his generosity.</i>
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
It is the devout desire of this translator to hasten the day when the story
of Beowulf shall be as familiar to English-speaking peoples as that of the Iliad.
Beowulf is our first great epic. It is an epitomized history of the life of the
Teutonic races. It brings vividly before us our forefathers of pre-Alfredian
eras, in their love of war, of sea, and of adventure.
</p>
<p>
My special thanks are due to Professors Francis A. March and James A.
Harrison, for advice, sympathy, and assistance.
</p>
<p class="signature">
J.L. HALL.
</p>
<h2>ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE NOTES.</h2>
<p>
B. = Bugge. C. = Cosijn. Gr. = Grein. Grdvtg. = Grundtvig. H. = Heyne. H. and
S. = Harrison and Sharp. H.-So. = Heyne-Socin. K.= Kemble. Kl. = Kluge. M.=
Müllenhoff. R. = Rieger. S. = Sievers. Sw. = Sweet. t.B. = ten Brink. Th. = Thorpe.
W. = Wülcker.
</p>
<h2><a href="#C.LISTOFWORDS">LIST OF WORDS AND PHRASES
NOT IN GENERAL USE.</a></h2>
<p>
ATHELING.—Prince, nobleman.
</p>
<p>
BAIRN.—Son, child.
</p>
<p>
BARROW.—Mound, rounded hill, funeral-mound.
</p>
<p>
BATTLE-SARK.—Armor.
</p>
<p>
BEAKER.—Cup, drinking-vessel.
</p>
<p>
BEGEAR.—Prepare.
</p>
<p>
BIGHT.—Bay, sea.
</p>
<p>
BILL.—Sword.
</p>
<p>
BOSS.—Ornamental projection.
</p>
<p>
BRACTEATE.—A round ornament on a necklace.
</p>
<p>
BRAND.—Sword.
</p>
<p>
BURN.—Stream.
</p>
<p>
BURNIE.—Armor.
</p>
<p>
CARLE.—Man, hero.
</p>
<p>
EARL.—Nobleman, any brave man.
</p>
<p>
EKE.—Also.
</p>
<p>
EMPRISE.—Enterprise, undertaking.
</p>
<p>
ERST.—Formerly.
</p>
<p>
ERST-WORTHY.—Worthy for a long time past.
</p>
<p>
FAIN.—Glad.
</p>
<p>
FERRY.—Bear, carry.
</p>
<p>
FEY.—Fated, doomed.
</p>
<p>
FLOAT.—Vessel, ship.
</p>
<p>
FOIN.—To lunge (Shaks.).
</p>
<p>
GLORY OF KINGS.—God.
</p>
<p>
GREWSOME.—Cruel, fierce.
</p>
<p>
HEFT.—Handle, hilt; used by synecdoche for ‘sword.’
</p>
<p>
HELM.—Helmet, protector.
</p>
<p>
HENCHMAN.—Retainer, vassal.
</p>
<p>
HIGHT.—Am (was) named.
</p>
<p>
HOLM.—Ocean, curved surface of the sea.
</p>
<p>
HIMSEEMED.—(It) seemed to him.
</p>
<p>
LIEF.—Dear, valued.
</p>
<p>
MERE.—Sea; in compounds, ‘mere-ways,’  ‘mere-currents,’  etc.
</p>
<p>
MICKLE.—Much.
</p>
<p>
NATHLESS.—Nevertheless.
</p>
<p>
NAZE.—Edge (nose).
</p>
<p>
NESS.—Edge.
</p>
<p>
NICKER.—Sea-beast.
</p>
<p>
QUIT, QUITE.—Requite.
</p>
<p>
RATHE.—Quickly.
</p>
<p>
REAVE.—Bereave, deprive.
</p>
<p>
SAIL-ROAD.—Sea.
</p>
<p>
SETTLE.—Seat, bench.
</p>
<p>
SKINKER.—One who pours.
</p>
<p>
SOOTHLY.—Truly.
</p>
<p>
SWINGE.—Stroke, blow.
</p>
<p>
TARGE, TARGET.—Shield.
</p>
<p>
THROUGHLY.—Thoroughly.
</p>
<p>
TOLD.—Counted.
</p>
<p>
UNCANNY.—Ill-featured, grizzly.
</p>
<p>
UNNETHE.—Difficult.
</p>
<p>
WAR-SPEED.—Success in war.
</p>
<p>
WEB.—Tapestry (that which is ‘woven’).
</p>
<p>
WEEDED.—Clad (cf. widow’s weeds).
</p>
<p>
WEEN.—Suppose, imagine.
</p>
<p>
WEIRD.—Fate, Providence.
</p>
<p>
WHILOM.—At times, formerly, often.
</p>
<p>
WIELDER.—Ruler. Often used of God; also in compounds, as ‘Wielder of Glory,’  ‘Wielder of Worship.’
</p>
<p>
WIGHT.—Creature.
</p>
<p>
WOLD.—Plane, extended surface.
</p>
<p>
WOT.—Knows.
</p>
<p>
YOUNKER.—Youth.
</p>