<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<title>Beowulf: An Anglo-Saxon Epic Poem</title>
<link href="#contents" rel="Contents"/>
<style type="text/css">
  /* <![CDATA[ */

@media print {
    a:link, a:visited {color: black; background-color: transparent}
    a:hover {color: black;  background-color: transparent}
}

@media screen {
    a:link, a:visited {color: #0000A0; background-color: transparent}
    a:hover {color: #0000A0;  background-color: transparent; text-decoration: underline;}
}

a:link, a:visited {text-decoration: none; background: transparent}
a:hover {text-decoration: underline; background: transparent}

body, html {
    margin-left: 10%;
    margin-right: 10%;
    color: black; background-color: white;
}

h1 {
   font-size: 280%; page-break-before: always;
   text-align: center;
}

p {
    text-align: justify;
    text-indent: 1.5em;
    margin-top: 1ex;
    margin-bottom: 1ex;
    vertical-align: baseline;
}

div.titlePage {
    page-break-after: always;
    margin-top: 2ex;
    margin-left: auto;
    margin-right: auto;
    margin-bottom: 4ex;
    padding-bottom: 2ex;
    padding-top: 2ex;

}

div.title-main {
    font-size: 400%; text-align: center; font-weight: normal;
    margin: 2ex 2em 2em 5ex;
}

div.title-LIC {
    font-size: 100%; text-align: center; font-weight: normal;
    padding-top: 15ex;
    padding-bottom: 15ex;
    line-height: 4ex;
}

div.title-dedication {
    font-size: 110%; text-align: center; font-weight: normal;
    padding-top: 15ex;
    padding-bottom: 15ex;
    line-height: 3ex;
    page-break-before: always;
}

div.byline {
    font-size: 150%; text-align: center;
    margin-top: 6ex; margin-bottom: 3ex;
    line-height: 3ex;
}

div.docTitle+div.byline { margin-top: 0ex; margin-bottom: 0ex; }

div.docTitle { margin-top: 0ex; margin-bottom: 0ex; }

div.byline+div.byline { margin-top: 0ex; margin-bottom: 0ex }

div.docEdition {
    font-size: 150%; text-align: center; font-weight: normal;
    margin-top: 3ex; margin-bottom: 3ex;
}

div.docAuthor {
    font-size: 130%; text-align: center; font-weight: normal;
    margin-top: 3ex; margin-bottom: 3ex; font-variant: small-caps;
}

div.docImprint {
    margin-top: 20ex; margin-bottom: 4ex;
    font-size: 150%; text-align: center; font-weight: normal;
}

div.docImprint p.small {
    font-size: 120%; text-align: center; font-weight: normal;
}

div.contents p {
    font-weight: bold; font-size: 150%; text-align: center;
}

div.contents {
    page-break-after: always;
    padding-bottom: 3ex;
 }

div.contents ul {
    list-style-type: none;
}

div.contents sub.lower {
    position:relative; top:1.5ex; right:-.25em; font-size: 100%;
}

div.contents sub.raise {
    position:relative; top:-1.5ex; right:-.25em; font-size: 100%;
}

div.contents span.big {
    font-size:150%;
    margin-bottom:0pt;
    padding-bottom:0pt;
}

div.contents li {
    font-variant: small-caps;
    margin-top: 0.5ex;
    margin-bottom: 0.5ex;
    height: 3ex;
}

q.italic {
    font-style: italic;
}

div.div1 h2 { font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 3ex; margin-top: 5ex; font-size: 150% }

h2,h3 {text-align: center; font-weight: normal; font-size: 100%; margin-bottom: 1ex }
hr                   { width: 50%; margin-bottom: 4ex; margin-top: 3ex;}
.smaller { font-size: smaller }

blockquote {
    margin-top: 2ex;
    margin-bottom: 2ex;
}

blockquote p {
    margin-top: 0ex;
    margin-bottom: 0ex;
    margin-left: 3em;
}

span.sidenote {
    display: block; width: 22%; float: right; clear: right;
    margin-bottom: 0.5ex; margin-top: 0.5ex; padding-left: 1em;
    font-size: 90%;  font-style: normal; font-weight: normal;
    text-align: left; text-indent: 0;
}

.linenum  {
    margin-top: 0.75ex; /* Corresponds to margin-top in the div.l rule */
    position:absolute; left:10%; right:100%;
    text-indent: 0; font-size: 90%;
}

.pagenum {
    display:block;
    margin-top: 0.5ex;
    position: absolute; left: 1%; right: 100%;
    font-size: 90%; text-align: left; color: #444;
    font-style: normal; font-weight: normal;
    font-variant: normal;
    text-indent: 0em; margin-left: 0.5em; padding-left: 0em;
}

.tocpagenum {
    position: absolute;
    right: 15em;
    text-align: right;
    font-variant: normal;
}

.tocpagehdr {
    position: absolute;
    right: 15em;
    text-align: right;
}

p.signature { text-align: right; padding-right: 2em }

div.footnote {
    text-align: justify; text-indent: -1.5em;
    margin-left: 1.5em; margin-top: 1ex; margin-bottom: 1ex;
}

div.footnotes {
    margin-left: 0em; margin-right: 0em; margin-top: 5ex; margin-bottom: 3ex;
    font-size: 90%
}

.footnoteref {font-size: 80%; font-weight: bold;}

div.l {
    text-indent: -2em; margin-left: 2em;
    margin-top: 0.3ex; margin-bottom: 0em;
}

div.fit h2 { font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 3ex; margin-top: 2ex}

div.fit h2.num { font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 1ex; margin-top: 5ex}

div.fit {
  margin-top: 1ex;
  margin-bottom: 1ex;
  margin-left: 3em;
}

.sc { font-variant: small-caps }

.small { font-size: 80% }

.gothic {
    font-family: Old English Text MT, sans-serif;
    font-weight:bold; font-size:130%;
    padding-top: 2ex;
}

.sic, .corr, .reg, .add { border-bottom: dotted maroon thin; }

div#LISTOFWORDS p {
    text-indent: -1em; margin-left: 1em;
}

div#GLOSSARY p {
    text-indent: -3em; margin-left: 3em;
}
  /* ]]> */
  </style>
</head>
<body lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">

<div class="titlePage">
<div class="title-main">BEOWULF</span>
<div class="title-main" style="font-size: 210%">AN ANGLO-SAXON EPIC POEM</span>
<div class="byline" style="font-style: italic">
  TRANSLATED<br/>FROM THE HEYNE-SOCIN TEXT
</span>
<div class="byline">
BY
</span>
<div class="byline">
<div class="docAuthor">JNO: LESSLIE HALL, Ph. D. (J.H.U.)</span>
</span>
<div class="byline" style="font-variant:small-caps">
Professor of English and History in The College of William and Mary
</span>
<div class="docImprint">D.C. HEATH &amp; CO., PUBLISHERS<br/>
<span class="small">BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO</span></span>
<div class="title-LIC">
Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1892, by<br/>
JNO: LESSLIE HALL,<br/>
in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.
</span>
<div class="title-dedication">
TO<br/>
<span class="gothic">My Wife</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="contents" id="contents">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_v">[v]</span>
<p class="contents">CONTENTS.</p>
<ul><li><span class="tocpagehdr">page</span></li>
<li><a href="#PREFACE" id="C.PREFACE">Preface </a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_vii">vii</a></li>
<li><a href="#BIBLIOGRAPHY" id="C.BIBLIOGRAPHY">Bibliography of Translations </a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_xi">xi</a></li>
<li><a href="#GLOSSARY" id="C.GLOSSARY">Glossary of Proper Names </a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_xiii">xiii</a></li>
<li><a href="#LISTOFWORDS" id="C.LISTOFWORDS">List of Words and Phrases not in General Use </a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_xviii">xviii</a></li>
<li>The Life and Death of Scyld <a href="#I" id="C.I"> (I.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_1">1</a></li>
<li>Scyld’s Successors <a href="#II" id="C.II"> (II.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_3">3</a></li>
<li>Hrothgar’s Great Mead-Hall</li>
<li>Grendel, the Murderer <a href="#III" id="C.III"> (III.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_5">5</a></li>
<li>Beowulf Goes to Hrothgar’s Assistance <a href="#IV" id="C.IV"> (IV.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_8">8</a></li>
<li>The Geats Reach Heorot <a href="#V" id="C.V"> (V.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_10">10</a></li>
<li>Beowulf Introduces Himself at the Palace <a href="#VI" id="C.VI"> (VI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_12">12</a></li>
<li>Hrothgar and Beowulf <a href="#VII" id="C.VII"> (VII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_14">14</a></li>
<li>Hrothgar and Beowulf (continued) <a href="#VIII" id="C.VIII"> (VIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_17">17</a></li>
<li>Unferth Taunts Beowulf <a href="#IX" id="C.IX"> (IX.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_19">19</a></li>
<li>Beowulf Silences Unferth <a href="#X" id="C.X"> (X.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_21">21</a></li>
<li>Glee is High</li>
<li>All Sleep save One <a href="#XI" id="C.XI"> (XI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_24">24</a></li>
<li>Grendel and Beowulf <a href="#XII" id="C.XII"> (XII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_26">26</a></li>
<li>Grendel is Vanquished <a href="#XIII" id="C.XIII"> (XIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_28">28</a></li>
<li>Rejoicing of the Danes <a href="#XIV" id="C.XIV"> (XIV.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_30">30</a></li>
<li>Hrothgar’s Gratitude <a href="#XV" id="C.XV"> (XV.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_33">33</a></li>
<li>Hrothgar Lavishes Gifts upon his Deliverer <a href="#XVI" id="C.XVI"> (XVI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_35">35</a></li>
<li>Banquet (continued) <a href="#XVII" id="C.XVII"> (XVII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_37">37</a></li>
<li>The Scop’s Song of Finn and Hnæf</li>
<li>The Finn Episode (continued) <a href="#XVIII" id="C.XVIII"> (XVIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_39">39</a></li>
<li>The Banquet Continues</li>
<li>Beowulf Receives Further Honor <a href="#XIX" id="C.XIX"> (XIX.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_41">41</a></li>
<li>The Mother of Grendel <a href="#XX" id="C.XX"> (XX.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_44">44</a></li>
<li>Hrothgar’s Account of the Monsters <a href="#XXI" id="C.XXI"> (XXI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_46">46</a></li>
<li>Beowulf Seeks Grendel’s Mother <a href="#XXII" id="C.XXII"> (XXII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_48">48</a></li>
<li>Beowulf’s Fight with Grendel’s Mother <a href="#XXIII" id="C.XXIII"> (XXIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_51">51</a></li>
<li>Beowulf is Double-Conqueror <a href="#XXIV" id="C.XXIV"> (XXIV.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_53">53</a></li>
<li>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_vi">[vi]</span>

Beowulf Brings his Trophies <a href="#XXV" id="C.XXV"> (XXV.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_57">57</a></li>
<li>Hrothgar’s Gratitude</li>
<li>Hrothgar Moralizes <a href="#XXVI" id="C.XXVI"> (XXVI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_60">60</a></li>
<li>Rest after Labor</li>
<li>Sorrow at Parting <a href="#XXVII" id="C.XXVII"> (XXVII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_62">62</a></li>
<li>The Homeward Journey <a href="#XXVIII" id="C.XXVIII"> (XXVIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_64">64</a></li>
<li>The Two Queens</li>
<li>Beowulf and Higelac <a href="#XXIX" id="C.XXIX"> (XXIX.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_67">67</a></li>
<li>Beowulf Narrates his Adventures to Higelac <a href="#XXX" id="C.XXX"> (XXX.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_69">69</a></li>
<li>Gift-Giving is Mutual <a href="#XXXI" id="C.XXXI"> (XXXI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_73">73</a></li>
<li>The Hoard and the Dragon <a href="#XXXII" id="C.XXXII"> (XXXII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_75">75</a></li>
<li>Brave Though Aged <a href="#XXXIII" id="C.XXXIII"> (XXXIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_78">78</a></li>
<li>Reminiscences</li>
<li>Beowulf Seeks the Dragon <a href="#XXXIV" id="C.XXXIV"> (XXXIV.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_81">81</a></li>
<li>Beowulf’s Reminiscences</li>
<li>Reminiscences (continued) <a href="#XXXV" id="C.XXXV"> (XXXV.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_83">83</a></li>
<li>Beowulf’s Last Battle</li>
<li>Wiglaf the Trusty <a href="#XXXVI" id="C.XXXVI"> (XXXVI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_88">88</a></li>
<li>Beowulf is Deserted by Friends and by Sword</li>
<li>The Fatal Struggle <a href="#XXXVII" id="C.XXXVII"> (XXXVII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_91">91</a></li>
<li>Beowulf’s Last Moments</li>
<li>Wiglaf Plunders the Dragon’s Den <a href="#XXXVIII" id="C.XXXVIII"> (XXXVIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_93">93</a></li>
<li>Beowulf’s Death</li>
<li>The Dead Foes <a href="#XXXIX" id="C.XXXIX"> (XXXIX.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_95">95</a></li>
<li>Wiglaf’s Bitter Taunts</li>
<li>The Messenger of Death <a href="#XL" id="C.XL"> (XL.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_97">97</a></li>
<li>The Messenger’s Retrospect <a href="#XLI" id="C.XLI"> (XLI.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_99">99</a></li>
<li>Wiglaf’s Sad Story <a href="#XLII" id="C.XLII"> (XLII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_103">103</a></li>
<li>The Hoard Carried Off</li>
<li>The Burning of Beowulf <a href="#XLIII" id="C.XLIII"> (XLIII.)</a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_106">106</a></li>
<li><a href="#ADDENDA" id="C.ADDENDA">Addenda </a><a class="tocpagenum" href="#page_109">109</a></li>
</ul>
</span>
<div class="div1" id="PREFACE">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_vii">[vii]</span>
<h2><a href="#C.PREFACE">PREFACE.</a></h2>
<div class="div2">
<p>
<span class="sc">The</span> present work is a modest effort to reproduce approximately, in modern
measures, the venerable epic, Beowulf. <i>Approximately</i>, I repeat; for a very
close reproduction of Anglo-Saxon verse would, to a large extent, be prose to
a modern ear.
</p>
<p>
The Heyne-Socin text and glossary have been closely followed. Occasionally
a deviation has been made, but always for what seemed good and sufficient
reason. The translator does not aim to be an editor. Once in a while, however,
he has added a conjecture of his own to the emendations quoted from
the criticisms of other students of the poem.
</p>
<p>
This work is addressed to two classes of readers. From both of these alike
the translator begs sympathy and co-operation. The Anglo-Saxon scholar he
hopes to please by adhering faithfully to the original. The student of English
literature he aims to interest by giving him, in modern garb, the most ancient
epic of our race. This is a bold and venturesome undertaking; and yet there
must be some students of the Teutonic past willing to follow even a daring
guide, if they may read in modern phrases of the sorrows of Hrothgar, of the
prowess of Beowulf, and of the feelings that stirred the hearts of our forefathers
in their primeval homes.
</p>
<p>
In order to please the larger class of readers, a regular cadence has been
used, a measure which, while retaining the essential characteristics of the original,
permits the reader to see ahead of him in reading.
</p>
<p>
Perhaps every Anglo-Saxon scholar has his own theory as to how Beowulf
should be translated. Some have given us prose versions of what we believe
to be a great poem. Is it any reflection on our honored Kemble and Arnold
to say that their translations fail to show a layman that Beowulf is justly called
our first <i>epic</i>? Of those translators who have used verse, several have written



<span class="pagenum" id="page_viii">[viii]</span>


from what would seem a mistaken point of view. Is it proper, for instance,
that the grave and solemn speeches of Beowulf and Hrothgar be put in ballad
measures, tripping lightly and airily along? Or, again, is it fitting that the
rough martial music of Anglo-Saxon verse be interpreted to us in the smooth
measures of modern blank verse? Do we hear what has been beautifully called
“the clanging tread of a warrior in mail”?
</p>
<p>
Of all English translations of Beowulf, that of Professor Garnett alone
gives any adequate idea of the chief characteristics of this great Teutonic
epic.
</p>
<p>
The measure used in the present translation is believed to be as near a
reproduction of the original as modern English affords. The cadences closely
resemble those used by Browning in some of his most striking poems. The
four stresses of the Anglo-Saxon verse are retained, and as much thesis and
anacrusis is allowed as is consistent with a regular cadence. Alliteration has
been used to a large extent; but it was thought that modern ears would hardly
tolerate it on every line. End-rhyme has been used occasionally; internal
rhyme, sporadically. Both have some warrant in Anglo-Saxon poetry. (For
end-rhyme, see <a href="#L.I.53">1 <span class="smaller">53</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.54">1 <span class="smaller">54</span></a>; for internal rhyme, <a href="#L.II.21">2 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>, <a href="#L.VI.40">6 <span class="smaller">40</span></a>.)
</p>
<p>
What Gummere<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#PREFACE.FNDEF.1" id="PREFACE.FNREF.1" title="Handbook of Poetics, page 175, 1st edition.">1</a></sup> calls the “rime-giver” has been studiously kept; <i>viz.</i>, the
first accented syllable in the second half-verse always carries the alliteration;
and the last accented syllable alliterates only sporadically. Alternate alliteration
is occasionally used as in the original. (See <a href="#L.VII.61">7 <span class="smaller">61</span></a>, <a href="#L.VIII.5">8 <span class="smaller">5</span></a>.)
</p>
<p>
No two accented syllables have been brought together, except occasionally
after a cæsural pause. (See <a href="#L.II.19">2 <span class="smaller">19</span></a> and <a href="#L.XII.1">12 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>.)
Or, scientifically speaking, Sievers’s
C type has been avoided as not consonant with the plan of translation. Several
of his types, however, constantly occur; <i>e.g.</i> A and a variant
(/ x | / x) (/ x x | / x);
B and a variant (x / | x / ) (x x / | x / ); a variant of D (/ x | / x x);
E (/ x x | / ). Anacrusis gives further variety to the types used in the translation.
</p>
<p>
The parallelisms of the original have been faithfully preserved. (<i>E.g.</i>, <a href="#L.I.16">1 <span class="smaller">16</span></a>
and <a href="#L.I.17">1 <span class="smaller">17</span></a>: “Lord” and “Wielder of Glory”; <a href="#L.I.30">1 <span class="smaller">30</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.31">1 <span class="smaller">31</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.32">1 <span class="smaller">32</span></a>; <a href="#L.II.12">2 <span class="smaller">12</span></a> and <a href="#L.II.13">2 <span class="smaller">13</span></a>;
<a href="#L.II.27">2 <span class="smaller">27</span></a> and <a href="#L.II.28">2 <span class="smaller">28</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.5">3 <span class="smaller">5</span></a> and <a href="#L.III.6">3 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>.) Occasionally, some loss has been sustained; but,
on the other hand, a gain has here and there been made.
</p>
<p>
The effort has been made to give a decided flavor of archaism to the translation.
All words not in keeping with the spirit of the poem have been


<span class="pagenum" id="page_ix">[ix]</span>


avoided. Again, though many archaic words have been used, there are none,
it is believed, which are not found in standard modern poetry.
</p>
<p>
With these preliminary remarks, it will not be amiss to give an outline of
the story of the poem.
</p>
</span>
<div class="div2">
<h2><i>THE STORY.</i></h2>
<p>
<i>Hrothgar, king of the Danes, or Scyldings, builds a great mead-hall, or
palace, in which he hopes to feast his liegemen and to give them presents. The
joy of king and retainers is, however, of short duration. Grendel, the monster,
is seized with hateful jealousy. He cannot brook the sounds of joyance that
reach him down in his fen-dwelling near the hall. Oft and anon he goes to
the joyous building, bent on direful mischief. Thane after thane is ruthlessly
carried off and devoured, while no one is found strong enough and bold enough
to cope with the monster. For twelve years he persecutes Hrothgar and his
vassals.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Over sea, a day’s voyage off, Beowulf, of the Geats, nephew of Higelac,
king of the Geats, hears of Grendel’s doings and of Hrothgar’s misery. He
resolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king. With fourteen
chosen companions, he sets sail for Dane-land. Reaching that country, he soon
persuades Hrothgar of his ability to help him. The hours that elapse before
night are spent in beer-drinking and conversation. When Hrothgar’s bedtime
comes he leaves the hall in charge of Beowulf, telling him that never before has
he given to another the absolute wardship of his palace. All retire to rest,
Beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Grendel comes, the great march-stepper, bearing God’s anger. He seizes
and kills one of the sleeping warriors. Then he advances towards Beowulf.
A fierce and desperate hand-to-hand struggle ensues. No arms are used, both
combatants trusting to strength and hand-grip. Beowulf tears Grendel’s
shoulder from its socket, and the monster retreats to his den, howling and
yelling with agony and fury. The wound is fatal.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>The next morning, at early dawn, warriors in numbers flock to the hall
Heorot, to hear the news. Joy is boundless. Glee runs high. Hrothgar and
his retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Grendel’s mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death. She
is furious and raging. While Beowulf is sleeping in a room somewhat apart



<span class="pagenum" id="page_x">[x]</span>


from the quarters of the other warriors, she seizes one of Hrothgar’s favorite
counsellors, and carries him off and devours him. Beowulf is called. Determined
to leave Heorot entirely purified, he arms himself, and goes down to look
for the female monster. After traveling through the waters many hours, he
meets her near the sea-bottom. She drags him to her den. There he sees
Grendel lying dead. After a desperate and almost fatal struggle with the
woman, he slays her, and swims upward in triumph, taking with him Grendel’s
head.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Joy is renewed at Heorot. Congratulations crowd upon the victor.
Hrothgar literally pours treasures into the lap of Beowulf; and it is agreed
among the vassals of the king that Beowulf will be their next liegelord.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Beowulf leaves Dane-land. Hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>When the hero arrives in his own land, Higelac treats him as a distinguished
guest. He is the hero of the hour.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>Beowulf subsequently becomes king of his own people, the Geats. After he
has been ruling for fifty years, his own neighborhood is wofully harried by a
fire-spewing dragon. Beowulf determines to kill him. In the ensuing struggle
both Beowulf and the dragon are slain. The grief of the Geats is inexpressible.
They determine, however, to leave nothing undone to honor the memory
of their lord. A great funeral-pyre is built, and his body is burnt. Then a
memorial-barrow is made, visible from a great distance, that sailors afar may
be constantly reminded of the prowess of the national hero of Geatland.</i>
</p>
<p>
<i>The poem closes with a glowing tribute to his bravery, his gentleness, his
goodness of heart, and his generosity.</i>
</p>
</span>
<div class="div2">
<hr/>
<p>
It is the devout desire of this translator to hasten the day when the story
of Beowulf shall be as familiar to English-speaking peoples as that of the Iliad.
Beowulf is our first great epic. It is an epitomized history of the life of the
Teutonic races. It brings vividly before us our forefathers of pre-Alfredian
eras, in their love of war, of sea, and of adventure.
</p>
<p>
My special thanks are due to Professors Francis A. March and James A.
Harrison, for advice, sympathy, and assistance.
</p>
<p class="signature">
J.L. HALL.
</p>
</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="PREFACE.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#PREFACE.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Handbook of Poetics, page 175, 1st edition.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="div1" id="ABBREVIATIONS">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xi">[xi]</span>
<h2>ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE NOTES.</h2>
<p>
B. = Bugge. C. = Cosijn. Gr. = Grein. Grdvtg. = Grundtvig. H. = Heyne. H. and
S. = Harrison and Sharp. H.-So. = Heyne-Socin. K.= Kemble. Kl. = Kluge. M.=
Müllenhoff. R. = Rieger. S. = Sievers. Sw. = Sweet. t.B. = ten Brink. Th. = Thorpe.
W. = Wülcker.
</p>
<hr/>
</span>
<div class="div1" id="BIBLIOGRAPHY">
<h2><a href="#C.BIBLIOGRAPHY">BIBLIOGRAPHY OF TRANSLATIONS.</a></h2>
<p>
<b>Arnold, Thomas.</b>—Beowulf. A heroic poem of the eighth century. London, 1876.
With English translation. Prose.
</p>
<p>
<b>Botkine, L.</b>—<span class="fr" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">Beowulf. Epopée Anglo-Saxonne.</span> Havre, 1877. First French translation.
Passages occasionally omitted.
</p>
<p>
<b>Conybeare, J.J.</b>—Illustrations of Anglo-Saxon Poetry. London, 1826. Full Latin
translation, and some passages translated into English blank-verse.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ettmuller, L.</b>—<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">Beowulf, stabreimend übersetzt. Zürich, 1840.</span>
</p>
<p>
<b>Garnett, J.M.</b>—Beowulf: an Anglo-Saxon Poem, and the Fight at Finnsburg. Boston,
1882. An accurate line-for-line translation, using alliteration occasionally, and sometimes
assuming a metrical cadence.
</p>
<p>
<b>Grein, C.W.M.</b>—<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">Dichtungen der Angelsachsen, stabreimend übersetzt. 2 Bde.</span>
Göttingen, 1857-59.
</p>
<p>
<b>Grion, Giusto.</b>—<span class="it" lang="it" xml:lang="it">Beovulf, poema epico anglo-sassone del VII. secolo, tradotto e illustrato.
Lucca, 1883. First Italian translation.</span>
</p>
<p>
<b>Grundtvig, N.F.S.</b>—<span class="da" lang="da" xml:lang="da">Bjowulfs Drape. Copenhagen, 1820.</span>
</p>
<p>
<b>Heyne, M.</b>—A translation in iambic measures. Paderborn, 1863.
</p>
<p>
<b>Kemble, J.M.</b>—The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Traveller’s Song, and the
Battle of Finnsburg. London, 1833. The second edition contains a prose translation of
Beowulf.
</p>
<p>
<b>Leo, H.</b>—<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">Ueber Beowulf.</span> Halle, 1839. Translations of extracts.
</p>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xii">[xii]</span>
<p>
<b>Lumsden, H.W.</b>—Beowulf, translated into modern rhymes. London, 1881. Ballad
measures. Passages occasionally omitted.
</p>
<p>
<b>Sandras, G.S.</b>—<span class="la" lang="la" xml:lang="la">De carminibus Cædmoni adjudicatis.</span> Paris, 1859. An extract from
Beowulf, with Latin translation.
</p>
<p>
<b>Schaldmose, F.</b>—<span class="da" lang="da" xml:lang="da">Beowulf og Scopes Widsith, to Angelsaxiske Digte.</span> Copenhagen,
1847.
</p>
<p>
<b>Simrock, K.</b>—<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">Beowulf. Uebersetzt und erläutert. Stuttgart und Augsburg, 1859.</span>
Alliterative measures.
</p>
<p>
<b>Thorkelin, G.J.</b>—<span class="la" lang="la" xml:lang="la">De Danorum rebus gestis secul. III. et IV. poema Danicum dialecto
Anglosaxonica. Havniæ, 1815.</span> Latin translation.
</p>
<p>
<b>Thorpe, B.</b>—The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Scôp or Gleeman’s Tale, and
the Fight at Finnsburg. Oxford, 1855. English translation in short lines, generally containing
two stresses.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wackerbarth, A.D.</b>—Beowulf, translated into English verse. London, 1849.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wickberg, R.</b>—<span class="se" lang="se" xml:lang="se">Beowulf, en <span class="corr" title="original: fornengelek">fornengelsk</span> hjeltedikt, öfersatt. <span class="corr" title="original: Westevvik">Westervik</span>.</span> First Swedish
translation.
</p>
<p>
<b>von Wolzogen, H.</b>—Beowulf, in alliterative measures. Leipzig.
</p>
<p>
<b>Zinsser, G.</b>—<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">Der Kampf Beowulfs mit Grendel.</span> Jahresbericht of the Realschule at
Forbach, 1881.
</p>
</span>
<div class="div1" id="GLOSSARY">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xiii">[xiii]</span>
<h2><a href="#C.GLOSSARY">GLOSSARY OF PROPER NAMES.</a></h2>
<hr/>
<p style="text-align: center">
[The figures refer to the divisions of the poem in which the respective names occur. The large figures refer
to fitts, the small, to lines in the fitts.]
</p>
<hr/>
<p>
<b>Ælfhere</b>.—A kinsman of Wiglaf.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.3">36 <span class="smaller">3</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Æschere</b>.—Confidential friend of King Hrothgar. Elder brother of Yrmenlaf. Killed by
Grendel.—<a href="#L.XXI.3">21 <span class="smaller">3</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXX.89">30 <span class="smaller">89</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Beanstan</b>.—Father of Breca.—<a href="#L.IX.26">9 <span class="smaller">26</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Beowulf</b>.—Son of Scyld, the founder of the dynasty of Scyldings. Father of Healfdene,
and grandfather of Hrothgar.—<a href="#L.I.18">1 <span class="smaller">18</span></a>; <a href="#L.II.1">2 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Beowulf</b>.—The hero of the poem. Sprung from the stock of Geats, son of Ecgtheow.
Brought up by his maternal grandfather Hrethel, and figuring in manhood as a
devoted liegeman of his uncle Higelac. A hero from his youth. Has the strength
of thirty men. Engages in a swimming-match with Breca. Goes to the help of
Hrothgar against the monster Grendel. Vanquishes Grendel and his mother.
Afterwards becomes king of the Geats. Late in life attempts to kill a fire-spewing
dragon, and is slain. Is buried with great honors. His memorial mound.—<a href="#L.VI.26">6 <span class="smaller">26</span></a>;
<a href="#L.VII.2">7 <span class="smaller">2</span></a>; <a href="#L.VII.9">7 <span class="smaller">9</span></a>; <a href="#L.IX.3">9 <span class="smaller">3</span></a>; <a href="#L.IX.8">9 <span class="smaller">8</span></a>; <a href="#L.XII.28">12 <span class="smaller">28</span></a>; <a href="#L.XII.43">12 <span class="smaller">43</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXIII.1">23 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>, etc.
</p>
<p>
<b>Breca</b>.—Beowulf’s opponent in the famous swimming-match.—<a href="#L.IX.8">9 <span class="smaller">8</span></a>; <a href="#L.IX.19">9 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>; <a href="#L.IX.21">9 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>; <a href="#L.IX.22">9 <span class="smaller">22</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Brondings</b>.—A people ruled by Breca.—<a href="#L.IX.23">9 <span class="smaller">23</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Brosinga mene</b>.—A famous collar once owned by the Brosings.—<a href="#L.XIX.7">19 <span class="smaller">7</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Cain</b>.—Progenitor of Grendel and other monsters.—<a href="#L.II.56">2 <span class="smaller">56</span></a>; <a href="#L.XX.11">20 <span class="smaller">11</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Dæghrefn</b>.—A warrior of the Hugs, killed by Beowulf.—<a href="#L.XXXV.40">35 <span class="smaller">40</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Danes</b>.—Subjects of Scyld and his descendants, and hence often called Scyldings. Other
names for them are Victory-Scyldings, Honor-Scyldings, Armor-Danes, Bright-Danes,
East-Danes, West-Danes, North-Danes, South-Danes, Ingwins, Hrethmen.—<a href="#L.I.1">1 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>;
<a href="#L.II.1">2 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.2">3 <span class="smaller">2</span></a>; <a href="#L.V.14">5 <span class="smaller">14</span></a>; <a href="#L.VII.1">7 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>, etc.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ecglaf</b>.—Father of Unferth, who taunts Beowulf.—<a href="#L.IX.1">9 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ecgtheow</b>.—Father of Beowulf, the hero of the poem. A widely-known Wægmunding
warrior. Marries Hrethel’s daughter. After slaying Heatholaf, a Wylfing, he flees
his country.—<a href="#L.VII.3">7 <span class="smaller">3</span></a>; <a href="#L.V.6">5 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>; <a href="#L.VIII.4">8 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ecgwela</b>.—A king of the Danes before Scyld.—<a href="#L.XXV.60">25 <span class="smaller">60</span></a>.
</p>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xiv">[xiv]</span>
<p>
<b>Elan</b>.—Sister of Hrothgar, and probably wife of Ongentheow, king of the Swedes.—<a href="#L.II.10">2 <span class="smaller">10</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Eagle Cape</b>.—A promontory in Geat-land, under which took place Beowulf’s last encounter.—<a href="#L.XLI.87">41 <span class="smaller">87</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Eadgils</b>.—Son of Ohthere and brother of Eanmund.—<a href="#L.XXXIV.2">34 <span class="smaller">2</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Eanmund</b>.—Son of Ohthere and brother of Eadgils. The reference to these brothers is
vague, and variously understood. Heyne supposes as follows: Raising a revolt
against their father, they are obliged to leave Sweden. They go to the land of the
Geats; with what intention, is not known, but probably to conquer and plunder.
The Geatish king, Heardred, is slain by one of the brothers, probably Eanmund.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.10">36 <span class="smaller">10</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXI.54">31 <span class="smaller">54</span></a> to <a href="#L.XXXI.60">31 <span class="smaller">60</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXIII.66">33 <span class="smaller">66</span></a> to <a href="#L.XXXIV.6">34 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Eofor</b>.—A Geatish hero who slays Ongentheow in war, and is rewarded by Hygelac with
the hand of his only daughter.—<a href="#L.XLI.18">41 <span class="smaller">18</span></a>; <a href="#L.XLI.48">41 <span class="smaller">48</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Eormenric</b>.—A Gothic king, from whom Hama took away the famous Brosinga mene.—<a href="#L.XIX.9">19 <span class="smaller">9</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Eomær</b>.—Son of Offa and Thrytho, king and queen of the Angles.—<a href="#L.XXVIII.69">28 <span class="smaller">69</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Finn</b>.—King of the North-Frisians and the Jutes. Marries Hildeburg. At his court takes
place the horrible slaughter in which the Danish general, Hnæf, fell. Later on, Finn
himself is slain by Danish warriors.—<a href="#L.XVII.18">17 <span class="smaller">18</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVII.30">17 <span class="smaller">30</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVII.44">17 <span class="smaller">44</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVIII.4">18 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVIII.23">18 <span class="smaller">23</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Fin-land</b>.—The country to which Beowulf was driven by the currents in his swimming-match.—<a href="#L.X.22">10 <span class="smaller">22</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Fitela</b>.—Son and nephew of King Sigemund, whose praises are sung in XIV.—<a href="#L.XIV.42">14 <span class="smaller">42</span></a>; <a href="#L.XIV.53">14 <span class="smaller">53</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Folcwalda</b>.—Father of Finn.—<a href="#L.XVII.38">17 <span class="smaller">38</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Franks</b>.—Introduced occasionally in referring to the death of Higelac.—<a href="#L.XIX.19">19 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>; <a href="#L.XL.21">40 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XL.24">40 <span class="smaller">24</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Frisians</b>.—A part of them are ruled by Finn. Some of them were engaged in the struggle
in which Higelac was slain.—<a href="#L.XVII.20">17 <span class="smaller">20</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVII.42">17 <span class="smaller">42</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVII.52">17 <span class="smaller">52</span></a>; <a href="#L.XL.21">40 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Freaware</b>.—Daughter of King Hrothgar. Married to Ingeld, a Heathobard prince.—<a href="#L.XXIX.60">29 <span class="smaller">60</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXX.32">30 <span class="smaller">32</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Froda</b>.—King of the Heathobards, and father of Ingeld.—<a href="#L.XXIX.62">29 <span class="smaller">62</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Garmund</b>.—Father of Offa.—<a href="#L.XXVIII.71">28 <span class="smaller">71</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Geats, Geatmen</b>.—The race to which the hero of the poem belongs. Also called Weder-Geats,
or Weders, War-Geats, Sea-Geats. They are ruled by Hrethel, Hæthcyn,
Higelac, and Beowulf.—<a href="#L.IV.7">4 <span class="smaller">7</span></a>; <a href="#L.VII.4">7 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>; <a href="#L.X.45">10 <span class="smaller">45</span></a>; <a href="#L.XI.8">11 <span class="smaller">8</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXVII.14">27 <span class="smaller">14</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXVIII.8">28 <span class="smaller">8</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Gepids</b>.—Named in connection with the Danes and Swedes.—<a href="#L.XXXV.34">35 <span class="smaller">34</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Grendel</b>.—A monster of the race of Cain. Dwells in the fens and moors. Is furiously
envious when he hears sounds of joy in Hrothgar’s palace. Causes the king untold
agony for years. Is finally conquered by Beowulf, and dies of his wound. His hand
and arm are hung up in Hrothgar’s hall Heorot. His head is cut off by Beowulf
when he goes down to fight with Grendel’s mother.—<a href="#L.II.50">2 <span class="smaller">50</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.1">3 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.13">3 <span class="smaller">13</span></a>; <a href="#L.VIII.19">8 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>; <a href="#L.XI.17">11 <span class="smaller">17</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XII.2">12 <span class="smaller">2</span></a>; <a href="#L.XIII.27">13 <span class="smaller">27</span></a>; <a href="#L.XV.3">15 <span class="smaller">3</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Guthlaf</b>.—A Dane of Hnæf’s party.—<a href="#L.XVIII.24">18 <span class="smaller">24</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Half-Danes</b>.—Branch of the Danes to which Hnæf belonged.—<a href="#L.XVII.19">17 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>.
</p>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xv">[xv]</span>
<p>
<b>Halga</b>.—Surnamed the Good. Younger brother of Hrothgar.—<a href="#L.II.9">2 <span class="smaller">9</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hama</b>.—Takes the Brosinga mene from Eormenric.—<a href="#L.XIX.7">19 <span class="smaller">7</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hæreth</b>.—Father of Higelac’s queen, Hygd.—<a href="#L.XXVIII.39">28 <span class="smaller">39</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXIX.18">29 <span class="smaller">18</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hæthcyn</b>.—Son of Hrethel and brother of Higelac. Kills his brother Herebeald accidentally.
Is slain at Ravenswood, fighting against Ongentheow.—<a href="#L.XXXIV.43">34 <span class="smaller">43</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXV.23">35 <span class="smaller">23</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XL.32">40 <span class="smaller">32</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Helmings</b>.—The race to which Queen Wealhtheow belonged.—<a href="#L.X.63">10 <span class="smaller">63</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heming</b>.—A kinsman of Garmund, perhaps nephew.—<a href="#L.XXVIII.54">28 <span class="smaller">54</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXVIII.70">28 <span class="smaller">70</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hengest</b>.—A Danish leader. Takes command on the fall of Hnæf.—<a href="#L.XVII.33">17 <span class="smaller">33</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVII.41">17 <span class="smaller">41</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Herebeald</b>.—Eldest son of Hrethel, the Geatish king, and brother of Higelac. Killed by
his younger brother Hæthcyn.—<a href="#L.XXXIV.43">34 <span class="smaller">43</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXIV.47">34 <span class="smaller">47</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heremod</b>.—A Danish king of a dynasty before the Scylding line. Was a source of great
sorrow to his people.—<a href="#L.XIV.64">14 <span class="smaller">64</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXV.59">25 <span class="smaller">59</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hereric</b>.—Referred to as uncle of Heardred, but otherwise unknown.—<a href="#L.XXXI.60">31 <span class="smaller">60</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hetwars</b>.—Another name for the Franks.—<a href="#L.XXXIII.51">33 <span class="smaller">51</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Healfdene</b>.—Grandson of Scyld and father of Hrothgar. Ruled the Danes long and well.—<a href="#L.II.5">2 <span class="smaller">5</span></a>;
<a href="#L.IV.1">4 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.VIII.14">8 <span class="smaller">14</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heardred</b>.—Son of Higelac and Hygd, king and queen of the Geats. Succeeds his father,
with Beowulf as regent. Is slain by the sons of Ohthere.—<a href="#L.XXXI.56">31 <span class="smaller">56</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXIII.63">33 <span class="smaller">63</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXIII.75">33 <span class="smaller">75</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heathobards</b>.—Race of Lombards, of which Froda is king. After Froda falls in battle
with the Danes, Ingeld, his son, marries Hrothgar’s daughter, Freaware, in order to
heal the feud.—<a href="#L.XXX.1">30 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXX.6">30 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heatholaf</b>.—A Wylfing warrior slain by Beowulf’s father.—<a href="#L.VIII.5">8 <span class="smaller">5</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heathoremes</b>.—The people on whose shores Breca is cast by the waves during his contest
with Beowulf.—<a href="#L.IX.21">9 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heorogar</b>.—Elder brother of Hrothgar, and surnamed ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Weoroda Ræswa</span>,’ Prince of the
Troopers.—<a href="#L.II.9">2 <span class="smaller">9</span></a>; <a href="#L.VIII.12">8 <span class="smaller">12</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hereward</b>.—Son of the above.—<a href="#L.XXXI.17">31 <span class="smaller">17</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Heort</b>, <b>Heorot</b>.—The great mead-hall which King Hrothgar builds. It is invaded by
Grendel for twelve years. Finally cleansed by Beowulf, the Geat. It is called
Heort on account of the hart-antlers which decorate it.—<a href="#L.II.25">2 <span class="smaller">25</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.32">3 <span class="smaller">32</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.52">3 <span class="smaller">52</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hildeburg</b>.—Wife of Finn, daughter of Hoce, and related to Hnæf,—probably his sister.—<a href="#L.XVII.21">17 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XVIII.34">18 <span class="smaller">34</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hnæf</b>.—Leader of a branch of the Danes called Half-Danes. Killed in the struggle at
Finn’s castle.—<a href="#L.XVII.19">17 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVII.61">17 <span class="smaller">61</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hondscio</b>.—One of Beowulf’s companions. Killed by Grendel just before Beowulf grappled
with that monster.—<a href="#L.XXX.43">30 <span class="smaller">43</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hoce</b>.—Father of Hildeburg and probably of Hnæf.—<a href="#L.XVII.26">17 <span class="smaller">26</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrethel</b>.—King of the Geats, father of Higelac, and grandfather of Beowulf.—<a href="#L.VII.4">7 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXIV.39">34 <span class="smaller">39</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrethla</b>.—Once used for Hrethel.—<a href="#L.VII.82">7 <span class="smaller">82</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrethmen</b>.—Another name for the Danes.—<a href="#L.VII.73">7 <span class="smaller">73</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrethric</b>.—Son of Hrothgar.—<a href="#L.XVIII.65">18 <span class="smaller">65</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXVII.19">27 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>.
</p>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xvi">[xvi]</span>
<p>
<b>Hreosna-beorh</b>.—A promontory in Geat-land, near which Ohthere’s sons made plundering
raids.—<a href="#L.XXXV.18">35 <span class="smaller">18</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrothgar</b>.—The Danish king who built the hall Heort, but was long unable to enjoy it on
account of Grendel’s persecutions. Marries Wealhtheow, a Helming lady. Has
two sons and a daughter. Is a typical Teutonic king, lavish of gifts. A devoted
liegelord, as his lamentations over slain liegemen prove. Also very appreciative of
kindness, as is shown by his loving gratitude to Beowulf.—<a href="#L.II.9">2 <span class="smaller">9</span></a>; <a href="#L.II.12">2 <span class="smaller">12</span></a>; <a href="#L.IV.1">4 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.VIII.10">8 <span class="smaller">10</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XV.1">15 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; etc., etc.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrothmund</b>.—Son of Hrothgar.—<a href="#L.XVIII.65">18 <span class="smaller">65</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrothulf</b>.—Probably a son of Halga, younger brother of Hrothgar. Certainly on terms of
close intimacy in Hrothgar’s palace.—<a href="#L.XVI.26">16 <span class="smaller">26</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVIII.57">18 <span class="smaller">57</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hrunting</b>.—Unferth’s sword, lent to Beowulf.—<a href="#L.XXII.71">22 <span class="smaller">71</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXV.9">25 <span class="smaller">9</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hugs</b>.—A race in alliance with the Franks and Frisians at the time of Higelac’s fall.—<a href="#L.XXXV.41">35 <span class="smaller">41</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hun</b>.—A Frisian warrior, probably general of the Hetwars. Gives Hengest a beautiful
sword.—<a href="#L.XVIII.19">18 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hunferth</b>.—Sometimes used for Unferth.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hygelac</b>, <b>Higelac</b>.—King of the Geats, uncle and liegelord of Beowulf, the hero of the
poem.—His second wife is the lovely Hygd, daughter of Hæreth. The son of their
union is Heardred. Is slain in a war with the Hugs, Franks, and Frisians combined.
Beowulf is regent, and afterwards king of the Geats.—<a href="#L.IV.6">4 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>; <a href="#L.V.4">5 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXVIII.34">28 <span class="smaller">34</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXIX.9">29 <span class="smaller">9</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XXIX.21">29 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXI.56">31 <span class="smaller">56</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Hygd</b>.—Wife of Higelac, and daughter of Hæreth. There are some indications that she
married Beowulf after she became a widow.—<a href="#L.XXVIII.37">28 <span class="smaller">37</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ingeld</b>.—Son of the Heathobard king, Froda. Marries Hrothgar’s daughter, Freaware,
in order to reconcile the two peoples.—<a href="#L.XXIX.62">29 <span class="smaller">62</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXX.32">30 <span class="smaller">32</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ingwins</b>.—Another name for the Danes.—<a href="#L.XVI.52">16 <span class="smaller">52</span></a>; <a href="#L.XX.69">20 <span class="smaller">69</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Jutes</b>.—Name sometimes applied to Finn’s people.—<a href="#L.XVII.22">17 <span class="smaller">22</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVII.38">17 <span class="smaller">38</span></a>; <a href="#L.XVIII.17">18 <span class="smaller">17</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Lafing</b>.—Name of a famous sword presented to Hengest by Hun.—<a href="#L.XVIII.19">18 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Merewing</b>.—A Frankish king, probably engaged in the war in which Higelac was slain.—<a href="#L.XL.29">40 <span class="smaller">29</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Nægling</b>.—Beowulf’s sword.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.76">36 <span class="smaller">76</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Offa</b>.—King of the Angles, and son of Garmund. Marries the terrible Thrytho who is so
strongly contrasted with Hygd.—<a href="#L.XXVIII.59">28 <span class="smaller">59</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXVIII.66">28 <span class="smaller">66</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ohthere</b>.—Son of Ongentheow, king of the Swedes. He is father of Eanmund and
Eadgils.—<a href="#L.XL.35">40 <span class="smaller">35</span></a>; <a href="#L.XL.39">40 <span class="smaller">39</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Onela</b>.—Brother of Ohthere.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.15">36 <span class="smaller">15</span></a>; <a href="#L.XL.39">40 <span class="smaller">39</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ongentheow</b>.—King of Sweden, of the Scylfing dynasty. Married, perhaps, Elan, daughter
of Healfdene.—<a href="#L.XXXV.26">35 <span class="smaller">26</span></a>; <a href="#L.XLI.16">41 <span class="smaller">16</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Oslaf</b>.—A Dane of Hnæf’s party.—<a href="#L.XVIII.24">18 <span class="smaller">24</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Ravenswood</b>.—The forest near which Hæthcyn was slain.—<a href="#L.XL.31">40 <span class="smaller">31</span></a>; <a href="#L.XL.41">40 <span class="smaller">41</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Scefing</b>.—Applied (<a href="#L.I.4">1 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>) to Scyld, and meaning ‘son of Scef.’
</p>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xvii">[xvii]</span>
<p>
<b>Scyld</b>.—Founder of the dynasty to which Hrothgar, his father, and grandfather belonged.
He dies, and his body is put on a vessel, and set adrift. He goes from Daneland
just as he had come to it—in a bark.—<a href="#L.I.4">1 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>; <a href="#L.I.19">1 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>; <a href="#L.I.27">1 <span class="smaller">27</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Scyldings</b>.—The descendants of Scyld. They are also called Honor-Scyldings, Victory-Scyldings,
War-Scyldings, etc. (See ‘Danes,’  above.)—<a href="#L.II.1">2 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.VII.1">7 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.VIII.1">8 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Scylfings</b>.—A Swedish royal line to which Wiglaf belonged.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.2">36 <span class="smaller">2</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Sigemund</b>.—Son of Wæls, and uncle and father of Fitela. His struggle with a dragon is
related in connection with Beowulf’s deeds of prowess.—<a href="#L.XIV.38">14 <span class="smaller">38</span></a>; <a href="#L.XIV.47">14 <span class="smaller">47</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Swerting</b>.—Grandfather of Higelac, and father of Hrethel.—<a href="#L.XIX.11">19 <span class="smaller">11</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Swedes</b>.—People of Sweden, ruled by the Scylfings.—<a href="#L.XXXV.13">35 <span class="smaller">13</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Thrytho</b>.—Wife of Offa, king of the Angles. Known for her fierce and unwomanly disposition.
She is introduced as a contrast to the gentle Hygd, queen of Higelac.—<a href="#L.XXVIII.42">28 <span class="smaller">42</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XXVIII.56">28 <span class="smaller">56</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Unferth</b>.—Son of Ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of Hrothgar. Taunts
Beowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match. Lends Beowulf his sword
when he goes to look for Grendel’s mother. In the MS. sometimes written <i>Hunferth</i>. <a href="#L.IX.1">9 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XVIII.41">18 <span class="smaller">41</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wæls</b>.—Father of Sigemund.—<a href="#L.XIV.60">14 <span class="smaller">60</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wægmunding</b>.—A name occasionally applied to Wiglaf and Beowulf, and perhaps derived
from a common ancestor, Wægmund.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.6">36 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXVIII.61">38 <span class="smaller">61</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Weders</b>.—Another name for Geats or Wedergeats.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wayland</b>.—A fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old Teutonic literature.—<a href="#L.VII.83">7 <span class="smaller">83</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wendels</b>.—The people of Wulfgar, Hrothgar’s messenger and retainer. (Perhaps = Vandals.)—<a href="#L.VI.30">6 <span class="smaller">30</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wealhtheow</b>.—Wife of Hrothgar. Her queenly courtesy is well shown in the poem.—<a href="#L.X.55">10 <span class="smaller">55</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Weohstan</b>, or <b>Wihstan</b>.—A Wægmunding, and father of Wiglaf.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.1">36 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Whale’s Ness</b>.—A prominent promontory, on which Beowulf’s mound was built.—<a href="#L.XXXVIII.52">38 <span class="smaller">52</span></a>;
<a href="#L.XLII.76">42 <span class="smaller">76</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wiglaf</b>.—Son of Wihstan, and related to Beowulf. He remains faithful to Beowulf in the
fatal struggle with the fire-drake. Would rather die than leave his lord in his dire
emergency.—<a href="#L.XXXVI.1">36 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXVI.3">36 <span class="smaller">3</span></a>; <a href="#L.XXXVI.28">36 <span class="smaller">28</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wonred</b>.—Father of Wulf and Eofor.—<a href="#L.XLI.20">41 <span class="smaller">20</span></a>; <a href="#L.XLI.26">41 <span class="smaller">26</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wulf</b>.—Son of Wonred. Engaged in the battle between Higelac’s and Ongentheow’s
forces, and had a hand-to-hand fight with Ongentheow himself. Ongentheow disables
him, and is thereupon slain by Eofor.—<a href="#L.XLI.19">41 <span class="smaller">19</span></a>; <a href="#L.XLI.29">41 <span class="smaller">29</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wulfgar</b>.—Lord of the Wendels, and retainer of Hrothgar.—<a href="#L.VI.18">6 <span class="smaller">18</span></a>; <a href="#L.VI.30">6 <span class="smaller">30</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Wylfings</b>.—A people to whom belonged Heatholaf, who was slain by Ecgtheow.—<a href="#L.VIII.6">8 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>; <a href="#L.VIII.16">8 <span class="smaller">16</span></a>.
</p>
<p>
<b>Yrmenlaf</b>.—Younger brother of Æschere, the hero whose death grieved Hrothgar so
deeply.—<a href="#L.XXI.4">21 <span class="smaller">4</span></a>.
</p>
</span>
<div class="div1" id="LISTOFWORDS">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_xviii">[xviii]</span>
<h2><a href="#C.LISTOFWORDS">LIST OF WORDS AND PHRASES
NOT IN GENERAL USE.</a></h2>
<p>
ATHELING.—Prince, nobleman.
</p>
<p>
BAIRN.—Son, child.
</p>
<p>
BARROW.—Mound, rounded hill, funeral-mound.
</p>
<p>
BATTLE-SARK.—Armor.
</p>
<p>
BEAKER.—Cup, drinking-vessel.
</p>
<p>
BEGEAR.—Prepare.
</p>
<p>
BIGHT.—Bay, sea.
</p>
<p>
BILL.—Sword.
</p>
<p>
BOSS.—Ornamental projection.
</p>
<p>
BRACTEATE.—A round ornament on a necklace.
</p>
<p>
BRAND.—Sword.
</p>
<p>
BURN.—Stream.
</p>
<p>
BURNIE.—Armor.
</p>
<p>
CARLE.—Man, hero.
</p>
<p>
EARL.—Nobleman, any brave man.
</p>
<p>
EKE.—Also.
</p>
<p>
EMPRISE.—Enterprise, undertaking.
</p>
<p>
ERST.—Formerly.
</p>
<p>
ERST-WORTHY.—Worthy for a long time past.
</p>
<p>
FAIN.—Glad.
</p>
<p>
FERRY.—Bear, carry.
</p>
<p>
FEY.—Fated, doomed.
</p>
<p>
FLOAT.—Vessel, ship.
</p>
<p>
FOIN.—To lunge (Shaks.).
</p>
<p>
GLORY OF KINGS.—God.
</p>
<p>
GREWSOME.—Cruel, fierce.
</p>
<p>
HEFT.—Handle, hilt; used by synecdoche for ‘sword.’
</p>
<p>
HELM.—Helmet, protector.
</p>
<p>
HENCHMAN.—Retainer, vassal.
</p>
<p>
HIGHT.—Am (was) named.
</p>
<p>
HOLM.—Ocean, curved surface of the sea.
</p>
<p>
HIMSEEMED.—(It) seemed to him.
</p>
<p>
LIEF.—Dear, valued.
</p>
<p>
MERE.—Sea; in compounds, ‘mere-ways,’  ‘mere-currents,’  etc.
</p>
<p>
MICKLE.—Much.
</p>
<p>
NATHLESS.—Nevertheless.
</p>
<p>
NAZE.—Edge (nose).
</p>
<p>
NESS.—Edge.
</p>
<p>
NICKER.—Sea-beast.
</p>
<p>
QUIT, QUITE.—Requite.
</p>
<p>
RATHE.—Quickly.
</p>
<p>
REAVE.—Bereave, deprive.
</p>
<p>
SAIL-ROAD.—Sea.
</p>
<p>
SETTLE.—Seat, bench.
</p>
<p>
SKINKER.—One who pours.
</p>
<p>
SOOTHLY.—Truly.
</p>
<p>
SWINGE.—Stroke, blow.
</p>
<p>
TARGE, TARGET.—Shield.
</p>
<p>
THROUGHLY.—Thoroughly.
</p>
<p>
TOLD.—Counted.
</p>
<p>
UNCANNY.—Ill-featured, grizzly.
</p>
<p>
UNNETHE.—Difficult.
</p>
<p>
WAR-SPEED.—Success in war.
</p>
<p>
WEB.—Tapestry (that which is ‘woven’).
</p>
<p>
WEEDED.—Clad (cf. widow’s weeds).
</p>
<p>
WEEN.—Suppose, imagine.
</p>
<p>
WEIRD.—Fate, Providence.
</p>
<p>
WHILOM.—At times, formerly, often.
</p>
<p>
WIELDER.—Ruler. Often used of God; also in compounds, as ‘Wielder of Glory,’  ‘Wielder of Worship.’
</p>
<p>
WIGHT.—Creature.
</p>
<p>
WOLD.—Plane, extended surface.
</p>
<p>
WOT.—Knows.
</p>
<p>
YOUNKER.—Youth.
</p>
</span>
<div class="div1" id="MAIN" style="page-break-before:always">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_1">[1]</span>
<h1>BEOWULF.</h1>
<div class="fit" id="I">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.I">I.</a></h2><h2>THE LIFE AND DEATH OF SCYLD.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">The famous race of
Spear-Danes.</span>
<span>Lo! the Spear-Danes’ glory through splendid achievements</span>
<span>The folk-kings’ former fame we have heard of,</span>
<span>How princes displayed then their prowess-in-battle.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Scyld, their mighty
king, in honor of
whom they are
often called Scyldings.
He is the
great-grandfather
of Hrothgar, so
prominent in the
poem.</span>
<span>Oft Scyld the Scefing from scathers in numbers</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>From many a people their mead-benches tore.</span>
<span>Since first he found him friendless and wretched,</span>
<span>The earl had had terror: comfort he got for it,</span>
<span>Waxed ’neath the welkin, world-honor gained,</span>
<span>Till all his neighbors o’er sea were compelled to</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Bow to his bidding and bring him their tribute:</span>
<span>An excellent atheling! After was borne him</span>
<span class="sidenote">A son is born to
him, who receives
the name of
Beowulf—a name
afterwards made so
famous by the hero
of the poem.</span>
<span>A son and heir, young in his dwelling,</span>
<span>Whom God-Father sent to solace the people.</span>
<span>He had marked the misery malice had caused them,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#I.FNDEF.1" id="I.FNREF.1">1</a></sup>That reaved of their rulers they wretched had erstwhile<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#I.FNDEF.2" id="I.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>Long been afflicted. The Lord, in requital,</span>
<span>Wielder of Glory, with world-honor blessed him.</span>
<span>Famed was Beowulf, far spread the glory</span>
<span>Of Scyld’s great son in the lands of the Danemen.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_2">[2]</span>
<span class="sidenote">The ideal Teutonic
king lavishes gifts
on his vassals.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>So the carle that is young, by kindnesses rendered</span>
<span>The friends of his father, with fees in abundance</span>
<span>Must be able to earn that when age approacheth</span>
<span>Eager companions aid him requitingly,</span>
<span>When war assaults him serve him as liegemen:</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>By praise-worthy actions must honor be got</span>
<span>’Mong all of the races. At the hour that was fated</span>
<span class="sidenote">Scyld dies at the
hour appointed by
Fate.</span>
<span>Scyld then departed to the All-Father’s keeping</span>
<span>Warlike to wend him; away then they bare him</span>
<span>To the flood of the current, his fond-loving comrades,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>As himself he had bidden, while the friend of the Scyldings</span>
<span>Word-sway wielded, and the well-lovèd land-prince</span>
<span>Long did rule them.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#I.FNDEF.3" id="I.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> The ring-stemmèd vessel,</span>
<span>Bark of the atheling, lay there at anchor,</span>
<span>Icy in glimmer and eager for sailing;</span>
<span class="sidenote">By his own request,
his body is
laid on a vessel
and wafted seaward.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>The belovèd leader laid they down there,</span>
<span>Giver of rings, on the breast of the vessel,</span>
<span>The famed by the mainmast. A many of jewels,</span>
<span>Of fretted embossings, from far-lands brought over,</span>
<span>Was placed near at hand then; and heard I not ever</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>That a folk ever furnished a float more superbly</span>
<span>With weapons of warfare, weeds for the battle,</span>
<span>Bills and burnies; on his bosom sparkled</span>
<span>Many a jewel that with him must travel</span>
<span>On the flush of the flood afar on the current.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>And favors no fewer they furnished him soothly,</span>
<span>Excellent folk-gems, than others had given him</span>
<span class="sidenote">He leaves Daneland
on the breast
of a bark.</span>
<span>Who when first he was born outward did send him</span>
<span>Lone on the main, the merest of infants:</span>
<span>And a gold-fashioned standard they stretched under heaven</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_3">[3]</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>High o’er his head, let the holm-currents bear him,</span>
<span>Seaward consigned him: sad was their spirit,</span>
<span>Their mood very mournful. Men are not able</span>
<span class="sidenote">No one knows
whither the boat
drifted.</span>
<span>Soothly to tell us, they in halls who reside,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#I.FNDEF.4" id="I.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span>Heroes under heaven, to what haven he hied.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="I.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#I.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For the ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þæt</span>’  of verse 15, Sievers suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þá</span>’  (= which). If this be
accepted, the sentence ‘He had … afflicted’  will read: <i>He</i> (<i>i.e.</i> God) <i>had
perceived the malice-caused sorrow which they, lordless, had formerly long
endured</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="I.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#I.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">aldor-léase</span>’  (15) Gr. suggested ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">aldor-ceare</span>’: <i>He perceived their
distress, that they formerly had suffered life-sorrow a long while</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="I.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#I.FNREF.3">[3]</a> A very difficult passage. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Áhte</span>’ (31) has no object. H. supplies ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">geweald</span>’
from the context; and our translation is based upon this assumption,
though it is far from satisfactory. Kl. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">lændagas</span>’  for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">lange</span>’: <i>And
the beloved land-prince enjoyed (had) his transitory days (i.e. lived)</i>. B. suggests
a dislocation; but this is a dangerous doctrine, pushed rather far by that
eminent scholar.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="I.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#I.FNREF.4">[4]</a> The reading of the H.-So. text has been quite closely followed; but some
eminent scholars read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">séle-rædenne</span>’  for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sele-rædende</span>.’  If that be adopted,
the passage will read: <i>Men cannot tell us, indeed, the order of Fate, etc.</i>
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sele-rædende</span>’  has two things to support it: (1) v. 1347; (2) it affords a
parallel to ‘men’  in <a href="#L.I.50">v. 50</a>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="II">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.II">II.</a></h2><h2>SCYLD’S SUCCESSORS.—HROTHGAR’S GREAT MEAD-HALL.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf succeeds
his father Scyld</span>
<span>In the boroughs then Beowulf, bairn of the Scyldings,</span>
<span>Belovèd land-prince, for long-lasting season</span>
<span>Was famed mid the folk (his father departed,</span>
<span>The prince from his dwelling), till afterward sprang</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Great-minded Healfdene; the Danes in his lifetime</span>
<span>He graciously governed, grim-mooded, agèd.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Healfdene’s birth.</span>
<span>Four bairns of his body born in succession</span>
<span>Woke in the world, war-troopers’ leader</span>
<span>Heorogar, Hrothgar, and Halga the good;</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Heard I that Elan was Ongentheow’s consort,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He has three sons—one
  of them,
  Hrothgar—and a
  daughter named
  Elan. Hrothgar
  becomes a mighty
  king.
</span>
<span>The well-beloved bedmate of the War-Scylfing leader.</span>
<span>Then glory in battle to Hrothgar was given,</span>
<span>Waxing of war-fame, that willingly kinsmen</span>
<span>Obeyed his bidding, till the boys grew to manhood,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>A numerous band.  It burned in his spirit</span>
<span>To urge his folk to found a great building,</span>
<span>A mead-hall grander than men of the era</span>
<span class="sidenote">He is eager to
  build a great hall
  in which he may
  feast his retainers</span>
<span>Ever had heard of, and in it to share</span>
<span>With young and old all of the blessings</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>The Lord had allowed him, save life and retainers.</span>
<span>Then the work I find afar was assigned</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_4">[4]</span>
<span>To many races in middle-earth’s regions,</span>
<span>To adorn the great folk-hall. In due time it happened</span>
<span>Early ’mong men, that ’twas finished entirely,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The greatest of hall-buildings; Heorot he named it</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hall is completed,
  and is called Heort, or
  Heorot.</span>
<span>Who wide-reaching word-sway wielded ’mong earlmen.</span>
<span>His promise he brake not, rings he lavished,</span>
<span>Treasure at banquet.  Towered the hall up</span>
<span>High and horn-crested, huge between antlers:</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>It battle-waves bided, the blasting fire-demon;</span>
<span>Ere long then from hottest hatred must sword-wrath</span>
<span>Arise for a woman’s husband and father.</span>
<span>Then the mighty war-spirit<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#II.FNDEF.1" id="II.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> endured for a season,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The Monster Grendel
  is madly envious
  of the Danemen’s
  joy.</span>
<span>Bore it bitterly, he who bided in darkness,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>That light-hearted laughter loud in the building</span>
<span>Greeted him daily; there was dulcet harp-music,</span>
<span>Clear song of the singer.  He said that was able</span>
<span class="sidenote">[The course of the
  story is interrupted
  by a short reference
  to some old account of the
  creation.]</span>
<span>To tell from of old earthmen’s beginnings,</span>
<span>That Father Almighty earth had created,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>The winsome wold that the water encircleth,</span>
<span>Set exultingly the sun’s and the moon’s beams</span>
<span>To lavish their lustre on land-folk and races,</span>
<span>And earth He embellished in all her regions</span>
<span>With limbs and leaves; life He bestowed too</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>On all the kindreds that live under heaven.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The glee of the
  warriors is overcast
  by a horrible
  dread.</span>
<span>So blessed with abundance, brimming with joyance,</span>
<span>The warriors abided, till a certain one gan to</span>
<span>Dog them with deeds of direfullest malice,</span>
<span>A foe in the hall-building: this horrible stranger<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#II.FNDEF.2" id="II.FNREF.2" title="Some authorities would translate ‘demon’  instead of ‘stranger.’ ">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Was Grendel entitled, the march-stepper famous</span>
<span>Who<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#II.FNDEF.3" id="II.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> dwelt in the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness;</span>
<span>The wan-mooded being abode for a season</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_5">[5]</span>
<span>In the land of the giants, when the Lord and Creator</span>
<span>Had banned him and branded. For that bitter murder,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>The killing of Abel, all-ruling Father</span>
<span class="sidenote">Cain is referred to
as a progenitor of
Grendel, and of
monsters in general.</span>
<span>The kindred of Cain crushed with His vengeance;</span>
<span>In the feud He rejoiced not, but far away drove him</span>
<span>From kindred and kind, that crime to atone for,</span>
<span>Meter of Justice. Thence ill-favored creatures,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Elves and giants, monsters of ocean,</span>
<span>Came into being, and the giants that longtime</span>
<span>Grappled with God; He gave them requital.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="II.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#II.FNREF.1">[1]</a> R. and t. B. prefer ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ellor-gæst</span>’  to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ellen-gæst</span>’  (86): <i>Then the stranger
from afar endured, etc.</i>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="II.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#II.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Some authorities would translate ‘<i>demon</i>’  instead of ‘<i>stranger</i>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="II.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#II.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Some authorities arrange differently, and render: <i>Who dwelt in the moor-fens,
the marsh and the fastness, the land of the giant-race.</i>
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="III">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.III">III.</a></h2><h2>GRENDEL THE MURDERER.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel attacks the
sleeping heroes</span>
<span>When the sun was sunken, he set out to visit</span>
<span>The lofty hall-building, how the Ring-Danes had used it</span>
<span>For beds and benches when the banquet was over.</span>
<span>Then he found there reposing many a noble</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Asleep after supper; sorrow the heroes,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.1" id="III.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Misery knew not. The monster of evil</span>
<span>Greedy and cruel tarried but little,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He drags off thirty
of them, and devours
them</span>
<span>Fell and frantic, and forced from their slumbers</span>
<span>Thirty of thanemen; thence he departed</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Leaping and laughing, his lair to return to,</span>
<span>With surfeit of slaughter sallying homeward.</span>
<span>In the dusk of the dawning, as the day was just breaking,</span>
<span>Was Grendel’s prowess revealed to the warriors:</span>
<span class="sidenote">A cry of agony
goes up, when
Grendel’s horrible
deed is fully realized.</span>
<span>Then, his meal-taking finished, a moan was uplifted,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Morning-cry mighty. The man-ruler famous,</span>
<span>The long-worthy atheling, sat very woful,</span>
<span>Suffered great sorrow, sighed for his liegemen,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_6">[6]</span>
<span>When they had seen the track of the hateful pursuer,</span>
<span>The spirit accursèd: too crushing that sorrow,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The monster returns
the next
night.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Too loathsome and lasting. Not longer he tarried,</span>
<span>But one night after continued his slaughter</span>
<span>Shameless and shocking, shrinking but little</span>
<span>From malice and murder; they mastered him fully.</span>
<span>He was easy to find then who otherwhere looked for</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>A pleasanter place of repose in the lodges,</span>
<span>A bed in the bowers. Then was brought to his notice</span>
<span>Told him truly by token apparent</span>
<span>The hall-thane’s hatred: he held himself after</span>
<span>Further and faster who the foeman did baffle.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.2" id="III.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>So ruled he and strongly strove against justice</span>
<span>Lone against all men, till empty uptowered</span>
<span class="sidenote">King Hrothgar’s
agony and suspense
last twelve
years.</span>
<span>The choicest of houses. Long was the season:</span>
<span>Twelve-winters’ time torture suffered</span>
<span>The friend of the Scyldings, every affliction,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Endless agony; hence it after<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.3" id="III.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> became</span>
<span>Certainly known to the children of men</span>
<span>Sadly in measures, that long against Hrothgar</span>
<span>Grendel struggled:—his grudges he cherished,</span>
<span>Murderous malice, many a winter,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Strife unremitting, and peacefully wished he</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.4" id="III.FNREF.4">4</a></sup>Life-woe to lift from no liegeman at all of</span>
<span>The men of the Dane-folk, for money to settle,</span>
<span>No counsellor needed count for a moment</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_7">[7]</span>
<span>On handsome amends at the hands of the murderer;</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel is unremitting
in his persecutions.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>The monster of evil fiercely did harass,</span>
<span>The ill-planning death-shade, both elder and younger,</span>
<span>Trapping and tricking them. He trod every night then</span>
<span>The mist-covered moor-fens; men do not know where</span>
<span>Witches and wizards wander and ramble.</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>So the foe of mankind many of evils</span>
<span>Grievous injuries, often accomplished,</span>
<span>Horrible hermit; Heort he frequented,</span>
<span>Gem-bedecked palace, when night-shades had fallen</span>
<span class="sidenote">God is against the
monster.</span>
<span>(Since God did oppose him, not the throne could he touch,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.5" id="III.FNREF.5">5</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>The light-flashing jewel, love of Him knew not).</span>
<span>’Twas a fearful affliction to the friend of the Scyldings</span>
<span class="sidenote">The king and his
council deliberate
in vain.</span>
<span>Soul-crushing sorrow. Not seldom in private</span>
<span>Sat the king in his council; conference held they</span>
<span>What the braves should determine ’gainst terrors unlooked for.</span>
<span class="sidenote">They invoke the
aid of their gods.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>At the shrines of their idols often they promised</span>
<span>Gifts and offerings, earnestly prayed they</span>
<span>The devil from hell would help them to lighten</span>
<span>Their people’s oppression. Such practice they used then,</span>
<span>Hope of the heathen; hell they remembered</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>In innermost spirit, God they knew not,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The true God they
do not know.</span>
<span>Judge of their actions, All-wielding Ruler,</span>
<span>No praise could they give the Guardian of Heaven,</span>
<span>The Wielder of Glory. Woe will be his who</span>
<span>Through furious hatred his spirit shall drive to</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>The clutch of the fire, no comfort shall look for,</span>
<span>Wax no wiser; well for the man who,</span>
<span>Living his life-days, his Lord may face</span>
<span>And find defence in his Father’s embrace!</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#III.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The translation is based on ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">weras</span>,’  adopted by H.-So.—K. and Th.
read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wera</span>’  and, arranging differently, render 119(2)-120: <i>They knew not
sorrow, the wretchedness of man, aught of misfortune</i>.—For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unhælo</span>’  (120)
R. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unfælo</span>’: <i>The uncanny creature, greedy and cruel, etc</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#III.FNREF.2">[2]</a> S. rearranges and translates: <i>So he ruled and struggled unjustly, one against
all, till the noblest of buildings stood useless (it was a long while) twelve years’
time: the friend of the Scyldings suffered distress, every woe, great sorrows, etc</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#III.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">syððan</span>,’  B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sárcwidum</span>’: <i>Hence in mournful words it became
well known, etc</i>. Various other words beginning with ‘s’ have been
conjectured.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#III.FNREF.4">[4]</a> The H.-So. glossary is very inconsistent in referring to this passage.—‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sibbe</span>’
(154), which H.-So. regards as an instr., B. takes as accus., obj. of
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wolde</span>.’  Putting a comma after <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Deniga</span>, he renders: <i>He did not desire
peace with any of the Danes, nor did he wish to remove their life-woe, nor to
settle for money</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#III.FNREF.5">[5]</a> Of this difficult passage the following interpretations among others are
given: (1) Though Grendel has frequented Heorot as a demon, he could not
become ruler of the Danes, on account of his hostility to God. (2) Hrothgar
was much grieved that Grendel had not appeared before his throne to receive
presents. (3) He was not permitted to devastate the hall, on account of the
Creator; <i>i.e.</i> God wished to make his visit fatal to him.—<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Ne … wisse</span> (169)
W. renders: <i>Nor had he any desire to do so</i>; ‘his’  being obj. gen. = <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">danach</span>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="IV">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_8">[8]</span>
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.IV">IV.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF GOES TO HROTHGAR’S ASSISTANCE.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar sees no
way of escape from
the persecutions of
Grendel.</span>
<span>So Healfdene’s kinsman constantly mused on</span>
<span>His long-lasting sorrow; the battle-thane clever</span>
<span>Was not anywise able evils to ’scape from:</span>
<span>Too crushing the sorrow that came to the people,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Loathsome and lasting the life-grinding torture,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf, the Geat,
hero of the poem,
hears of Hrothgar’s
sorrow, and resolves
to go to his
assistance.</span>
<span>Greatest of night-woes. So Higelac’s liegeman,</span>
<span>Good amid Geatmen, of Grendel’s achievements</span>
<span>Heard in his home:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.1" id="IV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> of heroes then living</span>
<span>He was stoutest and strongest, sturdy and noble.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>He bade them prepare him a bark that was trusty;</span>
<span>He said he the war-king would seek o’er the ocean,</span>
<span>The folk-leader noble, since he needed retainers.</span>
<span>For the perilous project prudent companions</span>
<span>Chided him little, though loving him dearly;</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>They egged the brave atheling, augured him glory.</span>
<span class="sidenote">With fourteen carefully
chosen companions,
he sets out
for Dane-land.</span>
<span>The excellent knight from the folk of the Geatmen</span>
<span>Had liegemen selected, likest to prove them</span>
<span>Trustworthy warriors; with fourteen companions</span>
<span>The vessel he looked for; a liegeman then showed them,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>A sea-crafty man, the bounds of the country.</span>
<span>Fast the days fleeted; the float was a-water,</span>
<span>The craft by the cliff. Clomb to the prow then</span>
<span>Well-equipped warriors: the wave-currents twisted</span>
<span>The sea on the sand; soldiers then carried</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>On the breast of the vessel bright-shining jewels,</span>
<span>Handsome war-armor; heroes outshoved then,</span>
<span>Warmen the wood-ship, on its wished-for adventure.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_9">[9]</span>
<span class="sidenote">The vessel sails
like a bird</span>
<span>The foamy-necked floater fanned by the breeze,</span>
<span>Likest a bird, glided the waters,</span>
<span class="sidenote">In twenty four
hours they reach
the shores of
Hrothgar’s dominions</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Till twenty and four hours thereafter</span>
<span>The twist-stemmed vessel had traveled such distance</span>
<span>That the sailing-men saw the sloping embankments,</span>
<span>The sea cliffs gleaming, precipitous mountains,</span>
<span>Nesses enormous<span class="add" title="Added">:</span> they were nearing the limits</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>At the end of the ocean.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.2" id="IV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> Up thence quickly</span>
<span>The men of the Weders clomb to the mainland,</span>
<span>Fastened their vessel (battle weeds rattled,</span>
<span>War burnies clattered), the Wielder they thanked</span>
<span>That the ways o’er the waters had waxen so gentle.</span>
<span class="sidenote">They are hailed by
the Danish coast
guard</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Then well from the cliff edge the guard of the Scyldings</span>
<span>Who the sea-cliffs should see to, saw o’er the gangway</span>
<span>Brave ones bearing beauteous targets,</span>
<span>Armor all ready, anxiously thought he,</span>
<span>Musing and wondering what men were approaching.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>High on his horse then Hrothgar’s retainer</span>
<span>Turned him to coastward, mightily brandished</span>
<span>His lance in his hands, questioned with boldness.</span>
<span class="sidenote">His challenge</span>
<span>“Who are ye men here, mail-covered warriors</span>
<span>Clad in your corslets, come thus a-driving</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>A high riding ship o’er the shoals of the waters,</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.3" id="IV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup>And hither ’neath helmets have hied o’er the ocean?</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_10">[10]</span>
<span>I have been strand-guard, standing as warden,</span>
<span>Lest enemies ever anywise ravage</span>
<span>Danish dominions with army of war-ships.</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>More boldly never have warriors ventured</span>
<span>Hither to come; of kinsmen’s approval,</span>
<span>Word-leave of warriors, I ween that ye surely</span>
<span class="sidenote">He is struck by
Beowulf’s appearance.</span>
<span>Nothing have known. Never a greater one</span>
<span>Of earls o’er the earth have <i>I</i> had a sight of</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Than is one of your number, a hero in armor;</span>
<span>No low-ranking fellow<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.4" id="IV.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> adorned with his weapons,</span>
<span>But launching them little, unless looks are deceiving,</span>
<span>And striking appearance. Ere ye pass on your journey</span>
<span>As treacherous spies to the land of the Scyldings</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>And farther fare, I fully must know now</span>
<span>What race ye belong to. Ye far-away dwellers,</span>
<span>Sea-faring sailors, my simple opinion</span>
<span>Hear ye and hearken: haste is most fitting</span>
<span>Plainly to tell me what place ye are come from.”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">From hám</span>’  (194) is much disputed. One rendering is: <i>Beowulf, being
away from home, heard of Hrothgar’s troubles, etc</i>. Another, that adopted by
S. and endorsed in the H.-So. notes, is: <i>B. heard from his neighborhood (neighbors),</i>
i.e. <i>in his home, etc</i>. A third is: <i>B., being at home, heard this as
occurring away from home</i>. The H.-So. glossary and notes conflict.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Eoletes</span>’ (224) is marked with a (?) by H<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>-So<span class="add" title="Added">.;</span> our rendering simply
follows his conjecture<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>—Other conjectures as to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eolet</span>’ are<span class="add" title="Added">:</span> (1) <i>voyage</i>,
(2) <i>toil</i>, <i>labor</i>, (3) <i>hasty journey</i><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The lacuna of the MS at this point has been supplied by various conjectures<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
The reading adopted by H<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>-So<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> has been rendered in the above translation<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
W<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>, like H<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>-So<span class="add" title="Added">.,</span> makes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ic</span>’ the beginning of a new sentence, but, for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">helmas
bæron</span>,’ he reads ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hringed stefnan<span class="add" title="Added">.’</span></span> This has the advantage of giving a
parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">brontne ceol</span>’ instead of a kenning for ‘go<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>’—B puts the (?)
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">holmas</span>’, and begins a new sentence at the middle of the line<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> Translate<span class="add" title="Added">:</span>
<i>What warriors are ye, clad in armor, who have thus come bringing the
foaming vessel over the water way, hither over the seas? For some time on
the wall I have been coast guard, etc</i>. S<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> endorses most of what B<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> says, but
leaves out ‘on the wall’ in the last sentence. If W.’s ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hringed stefnan</span>’ be
accepted, change <a href="#L.IV.51">line 51</a> above to, <i>A ring-stemmed vessel hither o’ersea</i><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.4">[4]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Seld-guma</span>’ (249) is variously rendered: (1) <i>housecarle</i>; (2) <i>home-stayer</i>;
(3) <i>common man</i>. Dr. H. Wood suggests <i>a man-at-arms in another’s house</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="V">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.V">V.</a></h2><h2>THE GEATS REACH HEOROT.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf courteously
replies.</span>
<span>The chief of the strangers rendered him answer,</span>
<span>War-troopers’ leader, and word-treasure opened:</span>
<span class="sidenote">We are Geats.</span>
<span>“We are sprung from the lineage of the people of Geatland,</span>
<span>And Higelac’s hearth-friends. To heroes unnumbered</span>
<span class="sidenote">My father Ecgtheow
was well-known
in his day.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>My father was known, a noble head-warrior</span>
<span>Ecgtheow titled; many a winter</span>
<span>He lived with the people, ere he passed on his journey,</span>
<span>Old from his dwelling; each of the counsellors</span>
<span>Widely mid world-folk well remembers him.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Our intentions
towards King
Hrothgar are of the
kindest.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>We, kindly of spirit, the lord of thy people,</span>
<span>The son of King Healfdene, have come here to visit,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_11">[11]</span>
<span>Folk-troop’s defender: be free in thy counsels!</span>
<span>To the noble one bear we a weighty commission,</span>
<span>The helm of the Danemen; we shall hide, I ween,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Is it true that a
monster is slaying
Danish heroes?</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Naught of our message. Thou know’st if it happen,</span>
<span>As we soothly heard say, that some savage despoiler,</span>
<span>Some hidden pursuer, on nights that are murky</span>
<span>By deeds very direful ’mid the Danemen exhibits</span>
<span>Hatred unheard of, horrid destruction</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>And the falling of dead. From feelings least selfish</span>
<span class="sidenote">I can help your
king to free himself
from this horrible
creature.</span>
<span>I am able to render counsel to Hrothgar,</span>
<span>How he, wise and worthy, may worst the destroyer,</span>
<span>If the anguish of sorrow should ever be lessened,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#V.FNDEF.1" id="V.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Comfort come to him, and care-waves grow cooler,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Or ever hereafter he agony suffer</span>
<span>And troublous distress, while towereth upward</span>
<span>The handsomest of houses high on the summit.”</span>
<span class="sidenote">The coast-guard
reminds Beowulf
that it is easier to
say than to do.</span>
<span>Bestriding his stallion, the strand-watchman answered,</span>
<span>The doughty retainer: “The difference surely</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>’Twixt words and works, the warlike shield-bearer</span>
<span>Who judgeth wisely well shall determine.</span>
<span>This band, I hear, beareth no malice</span>
<span class="sidenote">I am satisfied of
your good intentions,
and shall lead
you to the palace.</span>
<span>To the prince of the Scyldings. Pass ye then onward</span>
<span>With weapons and armor. I shall lead you in person;</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>To my war-trusty vassals command I shall issue</span>
<span>To keep from all injury your excellent vessel,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Your boat shall be
well cared for during
your stay here.</span>
<span>Your fresh-tarred craft, ’gainst every opposer</span>
<span>Close by the sea-shore, till the curved-neckèd bark shall</span>
<span>Waft back again the well-beloved hero</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>O’er the way of the water to Weder dominions.</span>
<span class="sidenote">He again compliments
Beowulf.</span>
<span>To warrior so great ’twill be granted sure</span>
<span>In the storm of strife to stand secure.”</span>
<span>Onward they fared then (the vessel lay quiet,</span>
<span>The broad-bosomed bark was bound by its cable,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_12">[12]</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Firmly at anchor); the boar-signs glistened<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#V.FNDEF.2" id="V.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>Bright on the visors vivid with gilding,</span>
<span>Blaze-hardened, brilliant; the boar acted warden.</span>
<span>The heroes hastened, hurried the liegemen,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The land is perhaps
rolling.</span>
<span>Descended together, till they saw the great palace,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>The well-fashioned wassail-hall wondrous and gleaming:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Heorot flashes on
their view.</span>
<span>’Mid world-folk and kindreds that was widest reputed</span>
<span>Of halls under heaven which the hero abode in;</span>
<span>Its lustre enlightened lands without number.</span>
<span>Then the battle-brave hero showed them the glittering</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Court of the bold ones, that they easily thither</span>
<span>Might fare on their journey; the aforementioned warrior</span>
<span>Turning his courser, quoth as he left them:</span>
<span class="sidenote">The coast-guard,
having discharged
his duty, bids them
God-speed.</span>
<span>“’Tis time I were faring; Father Almighty</span>
<span>Grant you His grace, and give you to journey</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Safe on your mission! To the sea I will get me</span>
<span>’Gainst hostile warriors as warden to stand.”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="V.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#V.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Edwendan</span>’ (280) B. takes to be the subs. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edwenden</span>’ (cf. 1775); and
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">bisigu</span>’ he takes as gen. sing., limiting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edwenden</span>’: <i>If reparation for
sorrows is ever to come</i>. This is supported by t.B.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="V.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#V.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Combining the emendations of B. and t.B., we may read: <i>The boar-images
glistened … brilliant, protected the life of the war-mooded man</i>. They
read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ferh-wearde</span>’ (305) and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúðmódgum men</span>’ (306).
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="VI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.VI">VI.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF INTRODUCES HIMSELF AT THE PALACE.</h2>
<span>The highway glistened with many-hued pebble,</span>
<span>A by-path led the liegemen together.</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VI.FNDEF.1" id="VI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup>Firm and hand-locked the war-burnie glistened,</span>
<span>The ring-sword radiant rang ’mid the armor</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>As the party was approaching the palace together</span>
<span class="sidenote">They set their
arms and armor
against the wall.</span>
<span>In warlike equipments. ’Gainst the wall of the building</span>
<span>Their wide-fashioned war-shields they weary did set then,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_13">[13]</span>
<span>Battle-shields sturdy; benchward they turned then;</span>
<span>Their battle-sarks rattled, the gear of the heroes;</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>The lances stood up then, all in a cluster,</span>
<span>The arms of the seamen, ashen-shafts mounted</span>
<span>With edges of iron: the armor-clad troopers</span>
<span class="sidenote">A Danish hero
asks them whence
and why they are
come.</span>
<span>Were decked with weapons. Then a proud-mooded hero</span>
<span>Asked of the champions questions of lineage:</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>“From what borders bear ye your battle-shields plated,</span>
<span>Gilded and gleaming, your gray-colored burnies,</span>
<span>Helmets with visors and heap of war-lances?—</span>
<span>To Hrothgar the king I am servant and liegeman.</span>
<span>’Mong folk from far-lands found I have never</span>
<span class="sidenote">He expresses no
little admiration
for the strangers.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Men so many of mien more courageous.</span>
<span>I ween that from valor, nowise as outlaws,</span>
<span>But from greatness of soul ye sought for King Hrothgar.”</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf replies.</span>
<span>Then the strength-famous earlman answer rendered,</span>
<span>The proud-mooded Wederchief replied to his question,</span>
<span class="sidenote">We are Higelac’s
table-companions,
and bear an important
commission to
your prince.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Hardy ’neath helmet: “Higelac’s mates are we;</span>
<span>Beowulf hight I. To the bairn of Healfdene,</span>
<span>The famous folk-leader, I freely will tell</span>
<span>To thy prince my commission, if pleasantly hearing</span>
<span>He’ll grant we may greet him so gracious to all men.”</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Wulfgar replied then (he was prince of the Wendels,</span>
<span>His boldness of spirit was known unto many,</span>
<span>His prowess and prudence): “The prince of the Scyldings,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wulfgar, the
thane, says that
he will go and ask
Hrothgar whether
he will see the
strangers.</span>
<span>The friend-lord of Danemen, I will ask of thy journey,</span>
<span>The giver of rings, as thou urgest me do it,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>The folk-chief famous, and inform thee early</span>
<span>What answer the good one mindeth to render me.”</span>
<span>He turned then hurriedly where Hrothgar was sitting,</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VI.FNDEF.2" id="VI.FNREF.2" title="Gr. and others translate ‘unhár’ by ‘bald’; old and bald.">2</a></sup>Old and hoary, his earlmen attending him;</span>
<span>The strength-famous went till he stood at the shoulder</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Of the lord of the Danemen, of courteous thanemen</span>
<span>The custom he minded. Wulfgar addressed then</span>
<span>His friendly liegelord: “Folk of the Geatmen</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_14">[14]</span>
<span class="sidenote">He thereupon
urges his liegelord
to receive the visitors
courteously.</span>
<span>O’er the way of the waters are wafted hither,</span>
<span>Faring from far-lands: the foremost in rank</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>The battle-champions Beowulf title.</span>
<span>They make this petition: with thee, O my chieftain,</span>
<span>To be granted a conference; O gracious King Hrothgar,</span>
<span>Friendly answer refuse not to give them!</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar, too, is
struck with Beowulf’s
appearance.</span>
<span>In war-trappings weeded worthy they seem</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Of earls to be honored; sure the atheling is doughty</span>
<span>Who headed the heroes hitherward coming.”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="VI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#VI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Instead of the punctuation given by H.-So, S. proposed to insert a comma
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">scír</span>’ (322), and to take ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hring-íren</span>’ as meaning ‘ring-mail’ and as
parallel with ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúð-byrne</span>.’ The passage would then read: <i>The firm and
hand-locked war-burnie shone, bright ring-mail, rang ’mid the armor, etc</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#VI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Gr. and others translate ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unhár</span>’ by ‘bald’; <i>old and bald</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="VII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.VII">VII.</a></h2><h2>HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar remembers
Beowulf as a
youth, and also
remembers his
father.</span>
<span>Hrothgar answered, helm of the Scyldings:</span>
<span>“I remember this man as the merest of striplings.</span>
<span>His father long dead now was Ecgtheow titled,</span>
<span>Him Hrethel the Geatman granted at home his</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>One only daughter; his battle-brave son</span>
<span>Is come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.</span>
<span>Seafaring sailors asserted it then,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is reported
to have the
strength of thirty
men.</span>
<span>Who valuable gift-gems of the Geatmen<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.1" id="VII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> carried</span>
<span>As peace-offering thither, that he thirty men’s grapple</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Has in his hand, the hero-in-battle.</span>
<span class="sidenote">God hath sent him
to our rescue.</span>
<span>The holy Creator usward sent him,</span>
<span>To West-Dane warriors, I ween, for to render</span>
<span>’Gainst Grendel’s grimness gracious assistance:</span>
<span>I shall give to the good one gift-gems for courage.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Hasten to bid them hither to speed them,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.2" id="VII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>To see assembled this circle of kinsmen;</span>
<span>Tell them expressly they’re welcome in sooth to</span>
<span>The men of the Danes.” To the door of the building</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_15">[15]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wulfgar invites the
strangers in.</span>
<span>Wulfgar went then, this word-message shouted:</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>“My victorious liegelord bade me to tell you,</span>
<span>The East-Danes’ atheling, that your origin knows he,</span>
<span>And o’er wave-billows wafted ye welcome are hither,</span>
<span>Valiant of spirit. Ye straightway may enter</span>
<span>Clad in corslets, cased in your helmets,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>To see King Hrothgar. Here let your battle-boards,</span>
<span>Wood-spears and war-shafts, await your conferring.”</span>
<span>The mighty one rose then, with many a liegeman,</span>
<span>An excellent thane-group; some there did await them,</span>
<span>And as bid of the brave one the battle-gear guarded.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Together they hied them, while the hero did guide them,</span>
<span>’Neath Heorot’s roof; the high-minded went then</span>
<span>Sturdy ’neath helmet till he stood in the building.</span>
<span>Beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten,</span>
<span>His armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman):</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf salutes
Hrothgar, and
then proceeds to
boast of his youthful
achievements.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>“Hail thou, Hrothgar! I am Higelac’s kinsman</span>
<span>And vassal forsooth; many a wonder</span>
<span>I dared as a stripling. The doings of Grendel,</span>
<span>In far-off fatherland I fully did know of:</span>
<span>Sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Excellent edifice, empty and useless</span>
<span>To all the earlmen after evenlight’s glimmer</span>
<span>’Neath heaven’s bright hues hath hidden its glory.</span>
<span>This my earls then urged me, the most excellent of them,</span>
<span>Carles very clever, to come and assist thee,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Folk-leader Hrothgar; fully they knew of</span>
<span class="sidenote">His fight with the
nickers.</span>
<span>The strength of my body. Themselves they beheld me</span>
<span>When I came from the contest, when covered with gore</span>
<span>Foes I escaped from, where five<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.3" id="VII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> I had bound,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_16">[16]</span>
<span>The giant-race wasted, in the waters destroying</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>The nickers by night, bore numberless sorrows,</span>
<span>The Weders avenged (woes had they suffered)</span>
<span>Enemies ravaged; alone now with Grendel</span>
<span class="sidenote">He intends to fight
Grendel unaided.</span>
<span>I shall manage the matter, with the monster of evil,</span>
<span>The giant, decide it. Thee I would therefore</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Beg of thy bounty, Bright-Danish chieftain,</span>
<span>Lord of the Scyldings, this single petition:</span>
<span>Not to refuse me, defender of warriors,</span>
<span>Friend-lord of folks, so far have I sought thee,</span>
<span>That <i>I</i> may unaided, my earlmen assisting me,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>This brave-mooded war-band, purify Heorot.</span>
<span>I have heard on inquiry, the horrible creature</span>
<span class="sidenote">Since the monster
uses no weapons,</span>
<span>From veriest rashness recks not for weapons;</span>
<span>I this do scorn then, so be Higelac gracious,</span>
<span>My liegelord belovèd, lenient of spirit,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>To bear a blade or a broad-fashioned target,</span>
<span>A shield to the onset; only with hand-grip</span>
<span class="sidenote">I, too, shall disdain
to use any.</span>
<span>The foe I must grapple, fight for my life then,</span>
<span>Foeman with foeman; he fain must rely on</span>
<span>The doom of the Lord whom death layeth hold of.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Should he crush
me, he will eat my
companions as he
has eaten thy
thanes.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>I ween he will wish, if he win in the struggle,</span>
<span>To eat in the war-hall earls of the Geat-folk,</span>
<span>Boldly to swallow<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.4" id="VII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> them, as of yore he did often</span>
<span>The best of the Hrethmen! Thou needest not trouble</span>
<span>A head-watch to give me;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.5" id="VII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> he will have me dripping</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_17">[17]</span>
<span class="sidenote">In case of my defeat,
thou wilt not
have the trouble of
burying me.</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>And dreary with gore, if death overtake me,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.6" id="VII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup></span>
<span>Will bear me off bleeding, biting and mouthing me,</span>
<span>The hermit will eat me, heedless of pity,</span>
<span>Marking the moor-fens; no more wilt thou need then</span>
<span class="sidenote">Should I fall, send
my armor to my
lord, King Higelac.</span>
<span>Find me my food.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.7" id="VII.FNREF.7">7</a></sup> If I fall in the battle,</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Send to Higelac the armor that serveth</span>
<span>To shield my bosom, the best of equipments,</span>
<span>Richest of ring-mails; ’tis the relic of Hrethla,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Weird is supreme</span>
<span>The work of Wayland. Goes Weird as she must go!”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Some render ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gif-sceattas</span>’ by ‘tribute.’—‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Géata</span>’ B. and Th. emended to
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Géatum</span>.’ If this be accepted, change ‘<i>of</i> the Geatmen’ to ‘<i>to</i> the Geatmen.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> If t.B.’s emendation of vv. 386, 387 be accepted, the two lines, ‘Hasten
… kinsmen’ will read: <i>Hasten thou, bid the throng of kinsmen go into the
hall together</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For 420 (<i>b</i>) and 421 (<i>a</i>), B. suggests: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þær ic (on) fífelgeban ýðde
eotena cyn</span> = <i>where I in the ocean destroyed the eoten-race</i>.—t.B. accepts B.’s
“brilliant” ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fífelgeban</span>,’ omits ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on</span>,’ emends ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cyn</span>’ to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hám</span>,’ arranging: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þær ic
fífelgeban ýðde, eotena hám</span> = <i>where I desolated the ocean, the home of the
eotens</i>.—This would be better but for changing ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cyn</span>’ to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hám</span>.’—I suggest:
<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þær ic fífelgeband (cf. nhd. Bande) ýðde, eotena cyn</span> = <i>where I conquered the
monster band, the race of the eotens</i>. This makes no change except to read
‘<i lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fífel</i>’ for ‘<i lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fífe</i>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Unforhte</span>’ (444) is much disputed.—H.-So. wavers between adj. and adv.
Gr. and B. take it as an adv. modifying <i><span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">etan</span>: Will eat the Geats fearlessly</i>.—Kl.
considers this reading absurd, and proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">anforhte</span>’ = timid.—Understanding
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unforhte</span>’ as an adj. has this advantage, viz. that it gives a parallel
to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Geátena leóde</span>’: but to take it as an adv. is more natural. Furthermore, to
call the Geats ‘brave’ might, at this point, seem like an implied thrust at the
Danes, so long helpless; while to call his own men ‘timid’ would be befouling
his own nest.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> For ‘head-watch,’ cf. H.-So. notes and cf. v. 2910.—Th. translates: <i>Thou
wilt not need my head to hide</i> (i.e., thou wilt have no occasion to bury me, as
Grendel will devour me whole).—Simrock imagines a kind of dead-watch.—Dr. H. Wood
suggests: <i>Thou wilt not have to bury so much as my head</i> (for
Grendel will be a thorough undertaker),—grim humor.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> S. proposes a colon after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">nimeð</span>’ (l. 447). This would make no essential
change in the translation.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.7">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.7">[7]</a> Owing to the vagueness of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feorme</span>’ (451), this passage is variously translated.
In our translation, H.-So.’s glossary has been quite closely followed.
This agrees substantially with B.’s translation (P. and B. XII. 87). R. translates:
<i>Thou needst not take care longer as to the consumption of my dead
body.</i> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Líc</span>’ is also a crux here, as it may mean living body or dead body.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="VIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.VIII">VIII.</a></h2><h2>HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.—<i>Continued</i>.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar responds.</span>
<span>Hrothgar discoursed, helm of the Scyldings:</span>
<span>“To defend our folk and to furnish assistance,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VIII.FNDEF.1" id="VIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Thou soughtest us hither, good friend Beowulf.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Reminiscences of
Beowulf’s father,
Ecgtheow.</span>
<span>The fiercest of feuds thy father engaged in,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Heatholaf killed he in hand-to-hand conflict</span>
<span>’Mid Wilfingish warriors; then the Wederish people</span>
<span>For fear of a feud were forced to disown him.</span>
<span>Thence flying he fled to the folk of the South-Danes,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_18">[18]</span>
<span>The race of the Scyldings, o’er the roll of the waters;</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>I had lately begun then to govern the Danemen,</span>
<span>The hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth,</span>
<span>Rich in its jewels: dead was Heregar,</span>
<span>My kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken,</span>
<span>Healfdene his bairn. He was better than I am!</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>That feud thereafter for a fee I compounded;</span>
<span>O’er the weltering waters to the Wilfings I sent</span>
<span>Ornaments old; oaths did he swear me.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar recounts
to Beowulf the
horrors of Grendel’s
persecutions.</span>
<span>It pains me in spirit to any to tell it,</span>
<span>What grief in Heorot Grendel hath caused me,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>What horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.</span>
<span>Waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop;</span>
<span>Weird hath offcast them to the clutches of Grendel.</span>
<span>God can easily hinder the scather</span>
<span>From deeds so direful. Oft drunken with beer</span>
<span class="sidenote">My thanes have
made many boasts,
but have not executed
them.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>O’er the ale-vessel promised warriors in armor</span>
<span>They would willingly wait on the wassailing-benches</span>
<span>A grapple with Grendel, with grimmest of edges.</span>
<span>Then this mead-hall at morning with murder was reeking,</span>
<span>The building was bloody at breaking of daylight,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>The bench-deals all flooded, dripping and bloodied,</span>
<span>The folk-hall was gory: I had fewer retainers,</span>
<span>Dear-beloved warriors, whom death had laid hold of.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Sit down to the
feast, and give us
comfort.</span>
<span>Sit at the feast now, thy intents unto heroes,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VIII.FNDEF.2" id="VIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>Thy victor-fame show, as thy spirit doth urge thee!”</span>
<span class="sidenote">A bench is made
ready for Beowulf
and his party.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>For the men of the Geats then together assembled,</span>
<span>In the beer-hall blithesome a bench was made ready;</span>
<span>There warlike in spirit they went to be seated,</span>
<span>Proud and exultant. A liegeman did service,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_19">[19]</span>
<span>Who a beaker embellished bore with decorum,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The gleeman sings</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>And gleaming-drink poured. The gleeman sang whilom</span>
<span class="sidenote">The heroes all rejoice
together.</span>
<span>Hearty in Heorot; there was heroes’ rejoicing,</span>
<span>A numerous war-band of Weders and Danemen.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="VIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#VIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. and S. reject the reading given in H.-So., and suggested by Grtvg. B.
suggests for 457-458:


<blockquote class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">
<div class="l">wáere-ryhtum Þú, wine mín Béowulf,</span>
<div class="l">and for ár-stafum úsic sóhtest.</span>
</blockquote>
<p>
This means: <i>From the obligations of clientage, my friend Beowulf, and for
assistance thou hast sought us</i>.—This gives coherence to Hrothgar’s opening
remarks in VIII., and also introduces a new motive for Beowulf’s coming to
Hrothgar’s aid.
</p>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="VIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#VIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> <i>Sit now at the feast, and disclose thy purposes to the victorious heroes, as
thy spirit urges</i>.—Kl. reaches the above translation by erasing the comma
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">meoto</span>’ and reading ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sige-hrèðsecgum</span>.’—There are other and bolder
emendations and suggestions. Of these the boldest is to regard ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">meoto</span>’ as a
verb (imperative), and read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on sæl</span>’: <i>Think upon gayety, etc</i>.—All the renderings
are unsatisfactory, the one given in our translation involving a zeugma.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="IX">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.IX">IX.</a></h2><h2>UNFERTH TAUNTS BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Unferth, a thane
of Hrothgar, is
jealous of Beowulf,
and undertakes to
twit him.</span>
<span>Unferth spoke up, Ecglaf his son,</span>
<span>Who sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings,</span>
<span>Opened the jousting (the journey<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IX.FNDEF.1" id="IX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> of Beowulf,</span>
<span>Sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to Unferth</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>And greatest chagrin, too, for granted he never</span>
<span>That any man else on earth should attain to,</span>
<span>Gain under heaven, more glory than he):</span>
<span class="sidenote">Did you take part
in a swimming-match
with Breca?</span>
<span>“Art thou that Beowulf with Breca did struggle,</span>
<span>On the wide sea-currents at swimming contended,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Where to humor your pride the ocean ye tried,</span>
<span class="sidenote">’Twas mere folly
that actuated you
both to risk your
lives on the ocean.</span>
<span>From vainest vaunting adventured your bodies</span>
<span>In care of the waters? And no one was able</span>
<span>Nor lief nor loth one, in the least to dissuade you</span>
<span>Your difficult voyage; then ye ventured a-swimming,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Where your arms outstretching the streams ye did cover,</span>
<span>The mere-ways measured, mixing and stirring them,</span>
<span>Glided the ocean; angry the waves were,</span>
<span>With the weltering of winter. In the water’s possession,</span>
<span>Ye toiled for a seven-night; he at swimming outdid thee,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>In strength excelled thee. Then early at morning</span>
<span>On the Heathoremes’ shore the holm-currents tossed him,</span>
<span>Sought he thenceward the home of his fathers,</span>
<span>Beloved of his liegemen, the land of the Brondings,</span>
<span>The peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_20">[20]</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Had borough and jewels. The pledge that he made thee</span>
<span class="sidenote">Breca outdid you
entirely.</span>
<span>The son of Beanstan hath soothly accomplished.</span>
<span>Then I ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Much more will
Grendel outdo you,
if you vie with him
in prowess.</span>
<span>Though ever triumphant in onset of battle,</span>
<span>A grim grappling, if Grendel thou darest</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>For the space of a night near-by to wait for!”</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf retaliates.</span>
<span>Beowulf answered, offspring of Ecgtheow:</span>
<span>“My good friend Unferth, sure freely and wildly,</span>
<span class="sidenote">O friend Unferth,
you are fuddled
with beer, and cannot
talk coherently.</span>
<span>Thou fuddled with beer of Breca hast spoken,</span>
<span>Hast told of his journey! A fact I allege it,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>That greater strength in the waters I had then,</span>
<span>Ills in the ocean, than any man else had.</span>
<span>We made agreement as the merest of striplings</span>
<span>Promised each other (both of us then were</span>
<span class="sidenote">We simply kept an
engagement made
in early life.</span>
<span>Younkers in years) that we yet would adventure</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Out on the ocean; it all we accomplished.</span>
<span>While swimming the sea-floods, sword-blade unscabbarded</span>
<span>Boldly we brandished, our bodies expected</span>
<span>To shield from the sharks. He sure was unable</span>
<span class="sidenote">He <i>could</i> not excel
me, and I <i>would</i>
not excel him.</span>
<span>To swim on the waters further than I could,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>More swift on the waves, nor <i>would</i> I from him go.</span>
<span>Then we two companions stayed in the ocean</span>
<span class="sidenote">After five days the
currents separated
us.</span>
<span>Five nights together, till the currents did part us,</span>
<span>The weltering waters, weathers the bleakest,</span>
<span>And nethermost night, and the north-wind whistled</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Fierce in our faces; fell were the billows.</span>
<span>The mere fishes’ mood was mightily ruffled:</span>
<span>And there against foemen my firm-knotted corslet,</span>
<span>Hand-jointed, hardy, help did afford me;</span>
<span>My battle-sark braided, brilliantly gilded,</span>
<span class="sidenote">A horrible sea-beast
attacked me,
but I slew him.</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Lay on my bosom. To the bottom then dragged me,</span>
<span>A hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,</span>
<span>Grim in his grapple: ’twas granted me, nathless,</span>
<span>To pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,</span>
<span>My obedient blade; battle offcarried</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>The mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="IX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#IX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> It has been plausibly suggested that ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">síð</span>’ (in 501 and in 353) means
‘arrival.’ If so, translate the bracket: <i>(the arrival of Beowulf, the brave
seafarer, was a source of great chagrin to Unferth, etc.)</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="X">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_21">[21]</span>
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.X">X.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF SILENCES UNFERTH.—GLEE IS HIGH.</h2>
<span>“So ill-meaning enemies often did cause me</span>
<span>Sorrow the sorest. I served them, in quittance,</span>
<span class="sidenote">My dear sword
always served me
faithfully.</span>
<span>With my dear-lovèd sword, as in sooth it was fitting;</span>
<span>They missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Ill-doers evil, of eating my body,</span>
<span>Of surrounding the banquet deep in the ocean;</span>
<span>But wounded with edges early at morning</span>
<span>They were stretched a-high on the strand of the ocean,</span>
<span class="sidenote">I put a stop to the
outrages of the sea-monsters.</span>
<span>Put to sleep with the sword, that sea-going travelers</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>No longer thereafter were hindered from sailing</span>
<span>The foam-dashing currents. Came a light from the east,</span>
<span>God’s beautiful beacon; the billows subsided,</span>
<span>That well I could see the nesses projecting,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Fortune helps the
brave earl.</span>
<span>The blustering crags. Weird often saveth</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>The undoomed hero if doughty his valor!</span>
<span>But me did it fortune<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#X.FNDEF.1" id="X.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> to fell with my weapon</span>
<span>Nine of the nickers. Of night-struggle harder</span>
<span>’Neath dome of the heaven heard I but rarely,</span>
<span>Nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean;</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Yet I ’scaped with my life the grip of the monsters,</span>
<span class="sidenote">After that escape I
drifted to Finland.</span>
<span>Weary from travel. Then the waters bare me</span>
<span>To the land of the Finns, the flood with the current,</span>
<span class="sidenote">I have never heard
of your doing any
such bold deeds.</span>
<span>The weltering waves. Not a word hath been told me</span>
<span>Of deeds so daring done by thee, Unferth,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>And of sword-terror none; never hath Breca</span>
<span>At the play of the battle, nor either of you two,</span>
<span>Feat so fearless performèd with weapons</span>
<span>Glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_22">[22]</span>
<span>. . . . . . . . . . . . I utter no boasting;</span>
<span class="sidenote">You are a slayer of
brothers, and will
suffer damnation,
wise as you may
be.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,</span>
<span>Thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get</span>
<span>Direful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.</span>
<span>I tell thee in earnest, offspring of Ecglaf,</span>
<span>Never had Grendel such numberless horrors,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>The direful demon, done to thy liegelord,</span>
<span>Harrying in Heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Had your acts been
as brave as your
words, Grendel had
not ravaged your
land so long.</span>
<span>Thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.</span>
<span>He hath found out fully that the fierce-burning hatred,</span>
<span>The edge-battle eager, of all of your kindred,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Of the Victory-Scyldings, need little dismay him:</span>
<span>Oaths he exacteth, not any he spares</span>
<span class="sidenote">The monster is not
afraid of the Danes,</span>
<span>Of the folk of the Danemen, but fighteth with pleasure,</span>
<span>Killeth and feasteth, no contest expecteth</span>
<span class="sidenote">but he will soon
learn to dread the
Geats.</span>
<span>From Spear-Danish people. But the prowess and valor</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Of the earls of the Geatmen early shall venture</span>
<span>To give him a grapple. He shall go who is able</span>
<span>Bravely to banquet, when the bright-light of morning</span>
<span class="sidenote">On the second day,
any warrior may
go unmolested to
the mead-banquet.</span>
<span>Which the second day bringeth, the sun in its ether-robes,</span>
<span>O’er children of men shines from the southward!”</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasure</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar’s spirits
are revived.</span>
<span>Was blithesome and joyous, the Bright-Danish ruler</span>
<span>Expected assistance; the people’s protector</span>
<span class="sidenote">The old king trusts
Beowulf.
The heroes are
joyful.</span>
<span>Heard from Beowulf his bold resolution.</span>
<span>There was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>The words were winsome. Wealhtheow advanced then,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Wealhtheow
plays the
hostess.</span>
<span>Consort of Hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,</span>
<span>Gold-decked saluted the men in the building,</span>
<span>And the freeborn woman the beaker presented</span>
<span class="sidenote">She offers the cup
to her husband
first.</span>
<span>To the lord of the kingdom, first of the East-Danes,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,</span>
<span>Lief to his liegemen; he lustily tasted</span>
<span>Of banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.</span>
<span>The Helmingish lady then graciously circled</span>
<span>’Mid all the liegemen lesser and greater:</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_23">[23]</span>
<span class="sidenote">She gives presents
to the heroes.</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Treasure-cups tendered, till time was afforded</span>
<span>That the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queen</span>
<span class="sidenote">Then she offers the
cup to Beowulf,
thanking God that
aid has come.</span>
<span>Might bear to Beowulf the bumper o’errunning;</span>
<span>She greeted the Geat-prince, God she did thank,</span>
<span>Most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>That in any of earlmen she ever should look for</span>
<span>Solace in sorrow. He accepted the beaker,</span>
<span>Battle-bold warrior, at Wealhtheow’s giving,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf states to
the queen the object
of his visit.</span>
<span>Then equipped for combat quoth he in measures,</span>
<span>Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>“I purposed in spirit when I mounted the ocean,</span>
<span class="sidenote">I determined to do
or die.</span>
<span>When I boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,</span>
<span>I would work to the fullest the will of your people</span>
<span>Or in foe’s-clutches fastened fall in the battle.</span>
<span>Deeds I shall do of daring and prowess,</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Or the last of my life-days live in this mead-hall.”</span>
<span>These words to the lady were welcome and pleasing,</span>
<span>The boast of the Geatman; with gold trappings broidered</span>
<span>Went the freeborn folk-queen her fond-lord to sit by.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Glee is high.</span>
<span>Then again as of yore was heard in the building</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Courtly discussion, conquerors’ shouting,</span>
<span>Heroes were happy, till Healfdene’s son would</span>
<span>Go to his slumber to seek for refreshing;</span>
<span>For the horrid hell-monster in the hall-building knew he</span>
<span>A fight was determined,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#X.FNDEF.2" id="X.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> since the light of the sun they</span>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<span>No longer could see, and lowering darkness</span>
<span>O’er all had descended, and dark under heaven</span>
<span>Shadowy shapes came shying around them.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar retires,
leaving Beowulf in
charge of the hall.</span>
<span>The liegemen all rose then. One saluted the other,</span>
<span>Hrothgar Beowulf, in rhythmical measures,</span>
<span class="linenum">95</span>
<span>Wishing him well, and, the wassail-hall giving</span>
<span>To his care and keeping, quoth he departing:</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_24">[24]</span>
<span>“Not to any one else have I ever entrusted,</span>
<span>But thee and thee only, the hall of the Danemen,</span>
<span>Since high I could heave my hand and my buckler.</span>
<span class="linenum">100</span>
<span>Take thou in charge now the noblest of houses;</span>
<span>Be mindful of honor, exhibiting prowess,</span>
<span>Watch ’gainst the foeman! Thou shalt want no enjoyments,</span>
<span>Survive thou safely adventure so glorious!”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="X.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#X.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The repetition of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwæðere</span>’ (574 and 578) is regarded by some scholars
as a defect. B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swá Þær</span>’ for the first: <i>So there it befell me, etc.</i>
Another suggestion is to change the second ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwæðere</span>’ into ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swá Þær</span>’: <i>So
there I escaped with my life, etc.</i>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="X.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#X.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Kl. suggests a period after ‘determined.’ This would give the passage
as follows: <i>Since they no longer could see the light of the sun, and lowering
darkness was down over all, dire under the heavens shadowy beings came going
around them</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XI">XI.</a></h2><h2>ALL SLEEP SAVE ONE.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar retires.</span>
<span>Then Hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,</span>
<span>Folk-lord of Scyldings, forth from the building;</span>
<span>The war-chieftain wished then Wealhtheow to look for,</span>
<span>The queen for a bedmate. To keep away Grendel</span>
<span class="sidenote">God has provided
a watch for the
hall.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>The Glory of Kings had given a hall-watch,</span>
<span>As men heard recounted: for the king of the Danemen</span>
<span>He did special service, gave the giant a watcher:</span>
<span>And the prince of the Geatmen implicitly trusted</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is self-confident</span>
<span>His warlike strength and the Wielder’s protection.</span>
<span class="sidenote">He prepares for
rest.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>His armor of iron off him he did then,</span>
<span>His helmet from his head, to his henchman committed</span>
<span>His chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,</span>
<span>And bade him bide with his battle-equipments.</span>
<span>The good one then uttered words of defiance,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Beowulf Geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf boasts of
his ability to cope
with Grendel.</span>
<span>“I hold me no meaner in matters of prowess,</span>
<span>In warlike achievements, than Grendel does himself;</span>
<span>Hence I seek not with sword-edge to sooth him to slumber,</span>
<span>Of life to bereave him, though well I am able.</span>
<span class="sidenote">We will fight with
nature’s weapons
only.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>No battle-skill<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XI.FNDEF.1" id="XI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> has he, that blows he should strike me,</span>
<span>To shatter my shield, though sure he is mighty</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_25">[25]</span>
<span>In strife and destruction; but struggling by night we</span>
<span>Shall do without edges, dare he to look for</span>
<span>Weaponless warfare, and wise-mooded Father</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The glory apportion, God ever-holy,</span>
<span class="sidenote">God may decide
who shall conquer</span>
<span>On which hand soever to him seemeth proper.”</span>
<span>Then the brave-mooded hero bent to his slumber,</span>
<span>The pillow received the cheek of the noble;</span>
<span class="sidenote">The Geatish warriors
lie down.</span>
<span>And many a martial mere-thane attending</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Sank to his slumber. Seemed it unlikely</span>
<span class="sidenote">They thought it
very unlikely that
they should ever
see their homes
again.</span>
<span>That ever thereafter any should hope to</span>
<span>Be happy at home, hero-friends visit</span>
<span>Or the lordly troop-castle where he lived from his childhood;</span>
<span>They had heard how slaughter had snatched from the wine-hall,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Had recently ravished, of the race of the Scyldings</span>
<span class="sidenote">But God raised up
a deliverer.</span>
<span>Too many by far. But the Lord to them granted</span>
<span>The weaving of war-speed, to Wederish heroes</span>
<span>Aid and comfort, that every opponent</span>
<span>By one man’s war-might they worsted and vanquished,</span>
<span class="sidenote">God rules the
world.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>By the might of himself; the truth is established</span>
<span>That God Almighty hath governed for ages</span>
<span>Kindreds and nations. A night very lurid</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel comes to
Heorot.</span>
<span>The trav’ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.</span>
<span>The warriors were sleeping who should watch the horned-building,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Only one warrior
is awake.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>One only excepted. ’Mid earthmen ’twas ’stablished,</span>
<span>Th’ implacable foeman was powerless to hurl them</span>
<span>To the land of shadows, if the Lord were unwilling;</span>
<span>But serving as warder, in terror to foemen,</span>
<span>He angrily bided the issue of battle.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XI.FNDEF.2" id="XI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Gr. understood ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gódra</span>’ as meaning ‘advantages in battle.’ This rendering
H.-So. rejects. The latter takes the passage as meaning that Grendel,
though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> B. in his masterly articles on Beowulf (P. and B. XII.) rejects the division
usually made at this point, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þá</span>.’ (711), usually rendered ‘then,’ he translates
‘when,’ and connects its clause with the foregoing sentence. These changes
he makes to reduce the number of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cóm</span>’s’ as principal verbs. (Cf. 703, 711,
721.) With all deference to this acute scholar, I must say that it seems to me
that the poet is exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme event
on which the whole subsequent action turns. First, he (Grendel) came <i>in
the wan night</i>; second, he came <i>from the moor</i>; third, he came <i>to the hall</i>.
Time, place from which, place to which, are all given.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XII">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_26">[26]</span>
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XII">XII.</a></h2><h2>GRENDEL AND BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel comes
from the fens.</span>
<span>’Neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then</span>
<span>Grendel going, God’s anger bare he.</span>
<span>The monster intended some one of earthmen</span>
<span>In the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:</span>
<span class="sidenote">He goes towards
the joyous building.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>He went under welkin where well he knew of</span>
<span>The wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,</span>
<span>Gold-hall of earthmen. Not the earliest occasion</span>
<span class="sidenote">This was not his
first visit there.</span>
<span>He the home and manor of Hrothgar had sought:</span>
<span>Ne’er found he in life-days later nor earlier</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Hardier hero, hall-thanes<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XII.FNDEF.1" id="XII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> more sturdy!</span>
<span>Then came to the building the warrior marching,</span>
<span class="sidenote">His horrid fingers
tear the door open.</span>
<span>Bereft of his joyance. The door quickly opened</span>
<span>On fire-hinges fastened, when his fingers had touched it;</span>
<span>The fell one had flung then—his fury so bitter—</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Open the entrance. Early thereafter</span>
<span>The foeman trod the shining hall-pavement,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He strides furiously
into the hall.</span>
<span>Strode he angrily; from the eyes of him glimmered</span>
<span>A lustre unlovely likest to fire.</span>
<span>He beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>A circle of kinsmen sleeping together,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He exults over his
supposed prey.</span>
<span>A throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant,</span>
<span>He minded to sunder from each of the thanemen</span>
<span>The life from his body, horrible demon,</span>
<span>Ere morning came, since fate had allowed him</span>
<span class="sidenote">Fate has decreed
that he shall devour
no more heroes.
Beowulf suffers
from suspense.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The prospect of plenty. Providence willed not</span>
<span>To permit him any more of men under heaven</span>
<span>To eat in the night-time. Higelac’s kinsman</span>
<span>Great sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_27">[27]</span>
<span>In unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>No thought had the monster of deferring the matter,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel immediately
seizes a
sleeping warrior,
and devours him.</span>
<span>But on earliest occasion he quickly laid hold of</span>
<span>A soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,</span>
<span>Bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,</span>
<span>Swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man’s</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.</span>
<span>Nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf and Grendel
grapple.</span>
<span>Snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,</span>
<span>Forward the foeman foined with his hand;</span>
<span>Caught he quickly the cunning deviser,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>On his elbow he rested. This early discovered</span>
<span>The master of malice, that in middle-earth’s regions,</span>
<span>’Neath the whole of the heavens, no hand-grapple greater</span>
<span class="sidenote">The monster is
amazed at Beowulf’s
strength.</span>
<span>In any man else had he ever encountered:</span>
<span>Fearful in spirit, faint-mooded waxed he,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Not off could betake him; death he was pondering,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He is anxious to
flee.</span>
<span>Would fly to his covert, seek the devils’ assembly:</span>
<span>His calling no more was the same he had followed</span>
<span>Long in his lifetime. The liege-kinsman worthy</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf recalls his
boast of the evening,
and determines
to fulfil it.</span>
<span>Of Higelac minded his speech of the evening,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.</span>
<span>His fingers crackled; the giant was outward,</span>
<span>The earl stepped farther. The famous one minded</span>
<span>To flee away farther, if he found an occasion,</span>
<span>And off and away, avoiding delay,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>To fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware of</span>
<span>The strength of his grapple in the grip of the foeman.</span>
<span class="sidenote">’Twas a luckless
day for Grendel.</span>
<span>’Twas an ill-taken journey that the injury-bringing,</span>
<span>Harrying harmer to Heorot wandered:</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hall groans.</span>
<span>The palace re-echoed; to all of the Danemen,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Dwellers in castles, to each of the bold ones,</span>
<span>Earlmen, was terror. Angry they both were,</span>
<span>Archwarders raging.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XII.FNDEF.2" id="XII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> Rattled the building;</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_28">[28]</span>
<span>’Twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood then</span>
<span>The bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Excellent earth-hall; but within and without it</span>
<span>Was fastened so firmly in fetters of iron,</span>
<span>By the art of the armorer. Off from the sill there</span>
<span>Bent mead-benches many, as men have informed me,</span>
<span>Adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>The Scylding wise men weened ne’er before</span>
<span>That by might and main-strength a man under heaven</span>
<span>Might break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent,</span>
<span>Crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fire</span>
<span>In smoke should consume it. The sound mounted upward</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s cries terrify
the Danes.</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>Novel enough; on the North Danes fastened</span>
<span>A terror of anguish, on all of the men there</span>
<span>Who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,</span>
<span>The song of defeat from the foeman of heaven,</span>
<span>Heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Hell-bound bewailing. He held him too firmly</span>
<span>Who was strongest of main-strength of men of that era.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. and t.B. emend so as to make lines 9 and 10 read: <i>Never in his life,
earlier or later, had he, the hell-thane, found a braver hero</i>.—They argue
that Beowulf’s companions had done nothing to merit such encomiums as the
usual readings allow them.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">réðe rén-weardas</span>’ (771), t.B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">réðe, rénhearde</span>.’ Translate:
<i>They were both angry, raging and mighty</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XIII">XIII.</a></h2><h2>GRENDEL IS VANQUISHED.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf has no
idea of letting
Grendel live.</span>
<span>For no cause whatever would the earlmen’s defender</span>
<span>Leave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer,</span>
<span>He deemed his existence utterly useless</span>
<span>To men under heaven. Many a noble</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Of Beowulf brandished his battle-sword old,</span>
<span>Would guard the life of his lord and protector,</span>
<span>The far-famous chieftain, if able to do so;</span>
<span>While waging the warfare, this wist they but little,</span>
<span>Brave battle-thanes, while his body intending</span>
<span class="sidenote">No weapon would
harm Grendel; he
bore a charmed
life.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>To slit into slivers, and seeking his spirit:</span>
<span>That the relentless foeman nor finest of weapons</span>
<span>Of all on the earth, nor any of war-bills</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_29">[29]</span>
<span>Was willing to injure; but weapons of victory</span>
<span>Swords and suchlike he had sworn to dispense with.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>His death at that time must prove to be wretched,</span>
<span>And the far-away spirit widely should journey</span>
<span>Into enemies’ power. This plainly he saw then</span>
<span>Who with mirth<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIII.FNDEF.1" id="XIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> of mood malice no little</span>
<span>Had wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>(To God he was hostile), that his body would fail him,</span>
<span>But Higelac’s hardy henchman and kinsman</span>
<span>Held him by the hand; hateful to other</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel is sorely
wounded.</span>
<span>Was each one if living. A body-wound suffered</span>
<span>The direful demon, damage incurable</span>
<span class="sidenote">His body bursts.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered,</span>
<span>His body did burst. To Beowulf was given</span>
<span>Glory in battle; Grendel from thenceward</span>
<span>Must flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes,</span>
<span>Sick unto death, his dwelling must look for</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fully</span>
<span class="sidenote">The monster flees
away to hide in
the moors.</span>
<span>The end of his earthly existence was nearing,</span>
<span>His life-days’ limits. At last for the Danemen,</span>
<span>When the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.</span>
<span>The comer-from-far-land had cleansed then of evil,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Wise and valiant, the war-hall of Hrothgar,</span>
<span>Saved it from violence. He joyed in the night-work,</span>
<span>In repute for prowess; the prince of the Geatmen</span>
<span>For the East-Danish people his boast had accomplished,</span>
<span>Bettered their burdensome bale-sorrows fully,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>The craft-begot evil they erstwhile had suffered</span>
<span>And were forced to endure from crushing oppression,</span>
<span>Their manifold misery. ’Twas a manifest token,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf suspends
Grendel’s hand and
arm in Heorot.</span>
<span>When the hero-in-battle the hand suspended,</span>
<span>The arm and the shoulder (there was all of the claw</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Of Grendel together) ’neath great-stretching hall-roof.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> It has been proposed to translate ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">myrðe</span>’ by <i>with sorrow</i>; but there
seems no authority for such a rendering. To the present translator, the phrase
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">módes myrðe</span>’ seems a mere padding for <i>gladly</i>; i.e., <i>he who gladly
harassed mankind</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XIV">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_30">[30]</span>
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XIV">XIV.</a></h2><h2>REJOICING OF THE DANES.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">At early dawn,
warriors from far
and near come together
to hear of
the night’s adventures.</span>
<span>In the mist of the morning many a warrior</span>
<span>Stood round the gift-hall, as the story is told me:</span>
<span>Folk-princes fared then from far and from near</span>
<span>Through long-stretching journeys to look at the wonder,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>The footprints of the foeman. Few of the warriors</span>
<span class="sidenote">Few warriors lamented
Grendel’s
destruction.</span>
<span>Who gazed on the foot-tracks of the inglorious creature</span>
<span>His parting from life pained very deeply,</span>
<span>How, weary in spirit, off from those regions</span>
<span>In combats conquered he carried his traces,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Fated and flying, to the flood of the nickers.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s blood
dyes the waters.</span>
<span>There in bloody billows bubbled the currents,</span>
<span>The angry eddy was everywhere mingled</span>
<span>And seething with gore, welling with sword-blood;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.1" id="XIV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>He death-doomed had hid him, when reaved of his joyance</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>He laid down his life in the lair he had fled to,</span>
<span>His heathenish spirit, where hell did receive him.</span>
<span>Thence the friends from of old backward turned them,</span>
<span>And many a younker from merry adventure,</span>
<span>Striding their stallions, stout from the seaward,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Heroes on horses. There were heard very often</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is the hero
of the hour.</span>
<span>Beowulf’s praises; many often asserted</span>
<span>That neither south nor north, in the circuit of waters,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He is regarded as a
probable successor
to Hrothgar.</span>
<span>O’er outstretching earth-plain, none other was better</span>
<span>’Mid bearers of war-shields, more worthy to govern,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>’Neath the arch of the ether. Not any, however,</span>
<span>’Gainst the friend-lord muttered, mocking-words uttered</span>
<span class="sidenote">But no word is
uttered to derogate
from the old king</span>
<span>Of Hrothgar the gracious (a good king he).</span>
<span>Oft the famed ones permitted their fallow-skinned horses</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_31">[31]</span>
<span>To run in rivalry, racing and chasing,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Where the fieldways appeared to them fair and inviting,</span>
<span>Known for their excellence; oft a thane of the folk-lord,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.2" id="XIV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">The gleeman sings
the deeds of heroes.</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.3" id="XIV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup>A man of celebrity, mindful of rhythms,</span>
<span>Who ancient traditions treasured in memory,</span>
<span>New word-groups found properly bound:</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>The bard after ’gan then Beowulf’s venture</span>
<span class="sidenote">He sings in alliterative
measures of
Beowulf’s prowess.</span>
<span>Wisely to tell of, and words that were clever</span>
<span>To utter skilfully, earnestly speaking,</span>
<span>Everything told he that he heard as to Sigmund’s</span>
<span class="sidenote">Also of Sigemund,
who has slain a
great fire-dragon.</span>
<span>Mighty achievements, many things hidden,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>The strife of the Wælsing, the wide-going ventures</span>
<span>The children of men knew of but little,</span>
<span>The feud and the fury, but Fitela with him,</span>
<span>When suchlike matters he minded to speak of,</span>
<span>Uncle to nephew, as in every contention</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Each to other was ever devoted:</span>
<span>A numerous host of the race of the scathers</span>
<span>They had slain with the sword-edge. To Sigmund accrued then</span>
<span>No little of glory, when his life-days were over,</span>
<span>Since he sturdy in struggle had destroyed the great dragon,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>The hoard-treasure’s keeper; ’neath the hoar-grayish stone he,</span>
<span>The son of the atheling, unaided adventured</span>
<span>The perilous project; not present was Fitela,</span>
<span>Yet the fortune befell him of forcing his weapon</span>
<span>Through the marvellous dragon, that it stood in the wall,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Well-honored weapon; the worm was <span class="corr" title="original: yslaughtered">slaughtered</span>.</span>
<span>The great one had gained then by his glorious achievement</span>
<span>To reap from the ring-hoard richest enjoyment,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_32">[32]</span>
<span>As best it did please him: his vessel he loaded,</span>
<span>Shining ornaments on the ship’s bosom carried,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Kinsman of Wæls: the drake in heat melted.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Sigemund was
widely famed.</span>
<span>He was farthest famed of fugitive pilgrims,</span>
<span>Mid wide-scattered world-folk, for works of great prowess,</span>
<span>War-troopers’ shelter: hence waxed he in honor.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.4" id="XIV.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">Heremod, an unfortunate
Danish
king, is introduced
by way of contrast.</span>
<span>Afterward Heremod’s hero-strength failed him,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>His vigor and valor. ’Mid venomous haters</span>
<span>To the hands of foemen he was foully delivered,</span>
<span>Offdriven early. Agony-billows</span>
<span class="sidenote">Unlike Sigemund
and Beowulf, Heremod
was a burden
to his people.</span>
<span>Oppressed him too long, to his people he became then,</span>
<span>To all the athelings, an ever-great burden;</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>And the daring one’s journey in days of yore</span>
<span>Many wise men were wont to deplore,</span>
<span>Such as hoped he would bring them help in their sorrow,</span>
<span>That the son of their ruler should rise into power,</span>
<span>Holding the headship held by his fathers,</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>Should govern the people, the gold-hoard and borough,</span>
<span>The kingdom of heroes, the realm of the Scyldings.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is an
honor to his race.</span>
<span>He to all men became then far more beloved,</span>
<span>Higelac’s kinsman, to kindreds and races,</span>
<span>To his friends much dearer; him malice assaulted.—</span>
<span class="sidenote">The story is resumed.</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Oft running and racing on roadsters they measured</span>
<span>The dun-colored highways. Then the light of the morning</span>
<span>Was hurried and hastened. Went henchmen in numbers</span>
<span>To the beautiful building, bold ones in spirit,</span>
<span>To look at the wonder; the liegelord himself then</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>From his wife-bower wending, warden of treasures,</span>
<span>Glorious trod with troopers unnumbered,</span>
<span>Famed for his virtues, and with him the queen-wife</span>
<span>Measured the mead-ways, with maidens attending.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> S. emends, suggesting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déop</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déog</span>,’ and removing semicolon after
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wéol</span><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>’ The two half-lines ‘welling … hid him’ would then read: <i>The
bloody deep welled with sword-gore</i>. B. accepts ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déop</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déog</span>,’ but reads
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déað-fæges</span>’: <i>The deep boiled with the sword-gore of the death-doomed one</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Another and quite different rendering of this passage is as follows: <i>Oft
a liegeman of the king, a fame-covered man mindful of songs, who very many
ancient traditions remembered (he found other word-groups accurately bound
together) began afterward to tell of Beowulf’s adventure, skilfully to narrate
it, etc</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Might ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">guma gilp-hladen</span>’ mean ‘a man laden with boasts of the deeds
of others’?
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.4">[4]</a> t.B. accepts B.’s ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hé þæs áron þáh</span>’ as given by H.-So., but puts a comma
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þáh</span>,’ and takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">siððan</span>’ as introducing a dependent clause: <i>He throve
in honor since Heremod’s strength … had decreased</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XV">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_33">[33]</span>
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XV">XV.</a></h2><h2>HROTHGAR’S GRATITUDE.</h2>
<span>Hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he,</span>
<span>He stood by the pillar,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XV.FNDEF.1" id="XV.FNREF.1" title="B. and t.B. read ‘staþole,’ and translate stood on the floor.">1</a></sup> saw the steep-rising hall-roof</span>
<span>Gleaming with gold-gems, and Grendel his hand there):</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar gives
thanks for the
overthrow of the
monster.</span>
<span>“For the sight we behold now, thanks to the Wielder</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Early be offered! Much evil I bided,</span>
<span>Snaring from Grendel:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XV.FNDEF.2" id="XV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> God can e’er ’complish</span>
<span>Wonder on wonder, Wielder of Glory!</span>
<span class="sidenote">I had given up all
hope, when this
brave liegeman
came to our aid.</span>
<span>But lately I reckoned ne’er under heaven</span>
<span>Comfort to gain me for any of sorrows,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>While the handsomest of houses horrid with bloodstain</span>
<span>Gory uptowered; grief had offfrightened<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XV.FNDEF.3" id="XV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>Each of the wise ones who weened not that ever</span>
<span>The folk-troop’s defences ’gainst foes they should strengthen,</span>
<span>’Gainst sprites and monsters. Through the might of the Wielder</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>A doughty retainer hath a deed now accomplished</span>
<span>Which erstwhile we all with our excellent wisdom</span>
<span class="sidenote">If his mother yet
liveth, well may
she thank God for
this son.</span>
<span>Failed to perform. May affirm very truly</span>
<span>What woman soever in all of the nations</span>
<span>Gave birth to the child, if yet she surviveth,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>That the long-ruling Lord was lavish to herward</span>
<span>In the birth of the bairn. Now, Beowulf dear,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hereafter, Beowulf,
thou shalt be
my son.</span>
<span>Most excellent hero, I’ll love thee in spirit</span>
<span>As bairn of my body; bear well henceforward</span>
<span>The relationship new. No lack shall befall thee</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Of earth-joys any I ever can give thee.</span>
<span>Full often for lesser service I’ve given</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_34">[34]</span>
<span>Hero less hardy hoard-treasure precious,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Thou hast won immortal
distinction.</span>
<span>To a weaker in war-strife. By works of distinction</span>
<span>Thou hast gained for thyself now that thy glory shall flourish</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Forever and ever. The All-Ruler quite thee</span>
<span>With good from His hand as He hitherto did thee!”</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf replies:
I was most happy
to render thee this
service.</span>
<span>Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow’s offspring:</span>
<span>“That labor of glory most gladly achieved we,</span>
<span>The combat accomplished, unquailing we ventured</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>The enemy’s grapple; I would grant it much rather</span>
<span>Thou wert able to look at the creature in person,</span>
<span>Faint unto falling, the foe in his trappings!</span>
<span>On murder-bed quickly I minded to bind him,</span>
<span>With firm-holding fetters, that forced by my grapple</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Low he should lie in life-and-death struggle</span>
<span>’Less his body escape; I was wholly unable,</span>
<span class="sidenote">I could not keep
the monster from
escaping, as God
did not will that I
should.</span>
<span>Since God did not will it, to keep him from going,</span>
<span>Not held him that firmly, hated opposer;</span>
<span>Too swift was the foeman. Yet safety regarding</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>He suffered his hand behind him to linger,</span>
<span>His arm and shoulder, to act as watcher;</span>
<span class="sidenote">He left his hand
and arm behind.</span>
<span>No shadow of solace the woe-begone creature</span>
<span>Found him there nathless: the hated destroyer</span>
<span>Liveth no longer, lashed for his evils,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>But sorrow hath seized him, in snare-meshes hath him</span>
<span>Close in its clutches, keepeth him writhing</span>
<span>In baleful bonds: there banished for evil</span>
<span>The man shall wait for the mighty tribunal,</span>
<span class="sidenote">God will give him
his deserts.</span>
<span>How the God of glory shall give him his earnings.”</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Then the soldier kept silent, son of old Ecglaf,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Unferth has nothing
more to say,
for Beowulf’s actions
speak louder
than words.</span>
<span>From boasting and bragging of battle-achievements,</span>
<span>Since the princes beheld there the hand that depended</span>
<span>’Neath the lofty hall-timbers by the might of the nobleman,</span>
<span>Each one before him, the enemy’s fingers;</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,</span>
<span>The heathen one’s hand-spur, the hero-in-battle’s</span>
<span>Claw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_35">[35]</span>
<span class="sidenote">No sword will
harm the monster.</span>
<span>That not any excellent edges of brave ones</span>
<span>Was willing to touch him, the terrible creature’s</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Battle-hand bloody to bear away from him.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. and t.B. read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">staþole</span>,’ and translate <i>stood on the floor</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘snaring from Grendel,’ ‘sorrows at Grendel’s hands’ has been suggested.
This gives a parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láðes</span>.’ ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Grynna</span>’ may well be gen. pl. of
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gyrn</span>,’ by a scribal slip.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The H.-So punctuation has been followed; but B. has been followed in
understanding ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehwylcne</span>’ as object of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wíd-scofen (hæfde)</span>.’ Gr. construes
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wéa</span>’ as nom abs.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XVI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XVI">XVI.</a></h2><h2>HROTHGAR LAVISHES GIFTS UPON HIS DELIVERER.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Heorot is adorned
with hands.</span>
<span>Then straight was ordered that Heorot inside<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVI.FNDEF.1" id="XVI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>With hands be embellished: a host of them gathered,</span>
<span>Of men and women, who the wassailing-building</span>
<span>The guest-hall begeared. Gold-flashing sparkled</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Webs on the walls then, of wonders a many</span>
<span>To each of the heroes that look on such objects.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hall is defaced,
however.</span>
<span>The beautiful building was broken to pieces</span>
<span>Which all within with irons was fastened,</span>
<span>Its hinges torn off: only the roof was</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Whole and uninjured when the horrible creature</span>
<span>Outlawed for evil off had betaken him,</span>
<span>Hopeless of living. ’Tis hard to avoid it</span>
<span class="sidenote">[A vague passage
of five verses.]</span>
<span>(Whoever will do it!); but he doubtless must come to<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVI.FNDEF.2" id="XVI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>The place awaiting, as Wyrd hath appointed,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Soul-bearers, earth-dwellers, earls under heaven,</span>
<span>Where bound on its bed his body shall slumber</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar goes to
the banquet.</span>
<span>When feasting is finished. Full was the time then</span>
<span>That the son of Healfdene went to the building;</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_36">[36]</span>
<span>The excellent atheling would eat of the banquet.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Ne’er heard I that people with hero-band larger</span>
<span>Bare them better tow’rds their bracelet-bestower.</span>
<span>The laden-with-glory stooped to the bench then</span>
<span>(Their kinsmen-companions in plenty were joyful,</span>
<span>Many a cupful quaffing complaisantly),</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Doughty of spirit in the high-tow’ring palace,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar’s
nephew, Hrothulf,
is present.</span>
<span>Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot then inside</span>
<span>Was filled with friendly ones; falsehood and treachery</span>
<span>The Folk-Scyldings now nowise did practise.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar lavishes
gifts upon Beowulf.</span>
<span>Then the offspring of Healfdene offered to Beowulf</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>A golden standard, as reward for the victory,</span>
<span>A banner embossed, burnie and helmet;</span>
<span>Many men saw then a song-famous weapon</span>
<span>Borne ’fore the hero. Beowulf drank of</span>
<span>The cup in the building; that treasure-bestowing</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>He needed not blush for in battle-men’s presence.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Four handsomer
gifts were never
presented.</span>
<span>Ne’er heard I that many men on the ale-bench</span>
<span>In friendlier fashion to their fellows presented</span>
<span>Four bright jewels with gold-work embellished.</span>
<span>’Round the roof of the helmet a head-guarder outside</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Braided with wires, with bosses was furnished,</span>
<span>That swords-for-the-battle fight-hardened might fail</span>
<span>Boldly to harm him, when the hero proceeded</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar commands
that eight
finely caparisoned
steeds be brought
to Beowulf.</span>
<span>Forth against foemen. The defender of earls then</span>
<span>Commanded that eight steeds with bridles</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Gold-plated, gleaming, be guided to hallward,</span>
<span>Inside the building; on one of them stood then</span>
<span>An art-broidered saddle embellished with jewels;</span>
<span>’Twas the sovereign’s seat, when the son of King Healfdene</span>
<span>Was pleased to take part in the play of the edges;</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>The famous one’s valor ne’er failed at the front when</span>
<span>Slain ones were bowing. And to Beowulf granted</span>
<span>The prince of the Ingwins, power over both,</span>
<span>O’er war-steeds and weapons; bade him well to enjoy them.</span>
<span>In so manly a manner the mighty-famed chieftain,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_37">[37]</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Hoard-ward of heroes, with horses and jewels</span>
<span>War-storms requited, that none e’er condemneth</span>
<span>Who willeth to tell truth with full justice.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XVI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XVI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Kl. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hroden</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">háten</span>,’ and renders: <i>Then quickly was
Heorot adorned within, with hands bedecked</i>.—B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrætwon</span>’ instead
of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrætwod</span>,’ and renders: <i>Then was it commanded to adorn Heorot
within quickly with hands</i>.—The former has the advantage of affording a
parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrætwod</span>’: both have the disadvantage of altering the text.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XVI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XVI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The passage 1005-1009 seems to be hopeless. One difficult point is to
find a subject for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gesacan</span>.’ Some say ‘he’; others supply ‘each,’ <i>i.e., every
soul-bearer … must gain the inevitable place</i>. The genitives in this case are
partitive.—If ‘he’ be subj., the genitives are dependent on ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gearwe</span>’ (= prepared).—The
‘he’ itself is disputed, some referring it to Grendel; but B.
takes it as involved in the parenthesis.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XVII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XVII">XVII.</a></h2><h2>BANQUET (<i>continued</i>).—THE SCOP’S SONG OF FINN AND HNÆF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Each of Beowulf’s
companions receives
a costly gift.</span>
<span>And the atheling of earlmen to each of the heroes</span>
<span>Who the ways of the waters went with Beowulf,</span>
<span>A costly gift-token gave on the mead-bench,</span>
<span>Offered an heirloom, and ordered that that man</span>
<span class="sidenote">The warrior killed
by Grendel is to be
paid for in gold.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>With gold should be paid for, whom Grendel had erstwhile</span>
<span>Wickedly slaughtered, as he more of them had done</span>
<span>Had far-seeing God and the mood of the hero</span>
<span>The fate not averted: the Father then governed</span>
<span>All of the earth-dwellers, as He ever is doing;</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Hence insight for all men is everywhere fittest,</span>
<span>Forethought of spirit! much he shall suffer</span>
<span>Of lief and of loathsome who long in this present</span>
<span>Useth the world in this woful existence.</span>
<span>There was music and merriment mingling together</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar’s scop
recalls events in
the reign of his
lord’s father.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Touching Healfdene’s leader; the joy-wood was fingered,</span>
<span>Measures recited, when the singer of Hrothgar</span>
<span>On mead-bench should mention the merry hall-joyance</span>
<span>Of the kinsmen of Finn, when onset surprised them:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hnæf, the Danish
general, is treacherously
attacked
while staying at
Finn’s castle.</span>
<span>“The Half-Danish hero, Hnæf of the Scyldings,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>On the field of the Frisians was fated to perish.</span>
<span>Sure Hildeburg needed not mention approving</span>
<span>The faith of the Jutemen: though blameless entirely,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Hildeburg
is not only wife of
Finn, but a kinswoman
of the murdered
Hnæf.</span>
<span>When shields were shivered she was shorn of her darlings,</span>
<span>Of bairns and brothers: they bent to their fate</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>With war-spear wounded; woe was that woman.</span>
<span>Not causeless lamented the daughter of Hoce</span>
<span>The decree of the Wielder when morning-light came and</span>
<span>She was able ’neath heaven to behold the destruction</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_38">[38]</span>
<span>Of brothers and bairns, where the brightest of earth-joys</span>
<span class="sidenote">Finn’s force is almost
exterminated.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>She had hitherto had: all the henchmen of Finn</span>
<span>War had offtaken, save a handful remaining,</span>
<span>That he nowise was able to offer resistance<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVII.FNDEF.1" id="XVII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">Hengest succeeds
Hnæf as Danish
general.</span>
<span>To the onset of Hengest in the parley of battle,</span>
<span>Nor the wretched remnant to rescue in war from</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>The earl of the atheling; but they offered conditions,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Compact between
the Frisians and the
Danes.</span>
<span>Another great building to fully make ready,</span>
<span>A hall and a high-seat, that half they might rule with</span>
<span>The sons of the Jutemen, and that Folcwalda’s son would</span>
<span>Day after day the Danemen honor</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>When gifts were giving, and grant of his ring-store</span>
<span>To Hengest’s earl-troop ever so freely,</span>
<span>Of his gold-plated jewels, as he encouraged the Frisians</span>
<span class="sidenote">Equality of gifts
agreed on.</span>
<span>On the bench of the beer-hall. On both sides they swore then</span>
<span>A fast-binding compact; Finn unto Hengest</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>With no thought of revoking vowed then most solemnly</span>
<span>The woe-begone remnant well to take charge of,</span>
<span>His Witan advising; the agreement should no one</span>
<span>By words or works weaken and shatter,</span>
<span>By artifice ever injure its value,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Though reaved of their ruler their ring-giver’s slayer</span>
<span>They followed as vassals, Fate so requiring:</span>
<span class="sidenote">No one shall refer
to old grudges.</span>
<span>Then if one of the Frisians the quarrel should speak of</span>
<span>In tones that were taunting, terrible edges</span>
<span>Should cut in requital. Accomplished the oath was,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>And treasure of gold from the hoard was uplifted.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Danish warriors
are burned on a
funeral-pyre.</span>
<span>The best of the Scylding braves was then fully</span>
<span>Prepared for the pile; at the pyre was seen clearly</span>
<span>The blood-gory burnie, the boar with his gilding,</span>
<span>The iron-hard swine, athelings many</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Fatally wounded; no few had been slaughtered.</span>
<span>Hildeburg bade then, at the burning of Hnæf,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_39">[39]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Hildeburg
has her son burnt
along with Hnæf.</span>
<span>The bairn of her bosom to bear to the fire,</span>
<span>That his body be burned and borne to the pyre.</span>
<span>The woe-stricken woman wept on his shoulder,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVII.FNDEF.2" id="XVII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>In measures lamented; upmounted the hero.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVII.FNDEF.3" id="XVII.FNREF.3" title="For ‘gúð-rinc,’ ‘gúð-réc,’ battle-smoke, has been suggested.">3</a></sup></span>
<span>The greatest of dead-fires curled to the welkin,</span>
<span>On the hill’s-front crackled; heads were a-melting,</span>
<span>Wound-doors bursting, while the blood was a-coursing</span>
<span>From body-bite fierce. The fire devoured them,</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>Greediest of spirits, whom war had offcarried</span>
<span>From both of the peoples; their bravest were fallen.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XVII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XVII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For 1084, R. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wiht Hengeste wið gefeohtan</span>.’—K. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wið
Hengeste wiht gefeohtan</span>.’ Neither emendation would make any essential
change in the translation.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XVII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XVII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The separation of adjective and noun by a phrase (cf. v. 1118) being very
unusual, some scholars have put ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">earme on eaxle</span>’ with the foregoing lines,
inserting a semicolon after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eaxle</span>.’ In this case ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on eaxe</span>’ (<i>i.e.</i>, on the ashes,
cinders) is sometimes read, and this affords a parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on bæl</span>.’ Let us hope
that a satisfactory rendering shall yet be reached without resorting to any tampering
with the text, such as Lichtenheld proposed: ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">earme ides on eaxle gnornode</span>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XVII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XVII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúð-rinc</span>,’ ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúð-réc</span>,’ <i>battle-smoke</i>, has been suggested.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XVIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XVIII">XVIII.</a></h2><h2>THE FINN EPISODE (<i>continued</i>).—THE BANQUET CONTINUES.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">The survivors go
to Friesland, the
home of Finn.</span>
<span>“Then the warriors departed to go to their dwellings,</span>
<span>Reaved of their friends, Friesland to visit,</span>
<span>Their homes and high-city. Hengest continued</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hengest remains
there all winter,
unable to get away.</span>
<span>Biding with Finn the blood-tainted winter,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Wholly unsundered;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVIII.FNDEF.1" id="XVIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> of fatherland thought he</span>
<span>Though unable to drive the ring-stemmèd vessel</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_40">[40]</span>
<span>O’er the ways of the waters; the wave-deeps were tossing,</span>
<span>Fought with the wind; winter in ice-bonds</span>
<span>Closed up the currents, till there came to the dwelling</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>A year in its course, as yet it revolveth,</span>
<span>If season propitious one alway regardeth,</span>
<span>World-cheering weathers. Then winter was gone,</span>
<span>Earth’s bosom was lovely; the exile would get him,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He devises
schemes of vengeance.</span>
<span>The guest from the palace; on grewsomest vengeance</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>He brooded more eager than on oversea journeys,</span>
<span>Whe’r onset-of-anger he were able to ’complish,</span>
<span>The bairns of the Jutemen therein to remember.</span>
<span>Nowise refused he the duties of liegeman</span>
<span>When Hun of the Frisians the battle-sword Láfing,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Fairest of falchions, friendly did give him:</span>
<span>Its edges were famous in folk-talk of Jutland.</span>
<span>And savage sword-fury seized in its clutches</span>
<span>Bold-mooded Finn where he bode in his palace,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Guthlaf and Oslaf
revenge Hnæf’s
slaughter.</span>
<span>When the grewsome grapple Guthlaf and Oslaf</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Had mournfully mentioned, the mere-journey over,</span>
<span>For sorrows half-blamed him; the flickering spirit</span>
<span>Could not bide in his bosom. Then the building was covered<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVIII.FNDEF.2" id="XVIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">Finn is slain.</span>
<span>With corpses of foemen, and Finn too was slaughtered,</span>
<span>The king with his comrades, and the queen made a prisoner.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The jewels of Finn,
and his queen are
carried away by
the Danes.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>The troops of the Scyldings bore to their vessels</span>
<span>All that the land-king had in his palace,</span>
<span>Such trinkets and treasures they took as, on searching,</span>
<span>At Finn’s they could find. They ferried to Daneland</span>
<span>The excellent woman on oversea journey,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The lay is concluded,
and the
main story is resumed.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Led her to their land-folk.” The lay was concluded,</span>
<span>The gleeman’s recital. Shouts again rose then,</span>
<span>Bench-glee resounded, bearers then offered</span>
<span class="sidenote">Skinkers carry
round the beaker.</span>
<span>Wine from wonder-vats. Wealhtheo advanced then</span>
<span>Going ’neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_41">[41]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Wealhtheow
greets
Hrothgar, as he
sits beside Hrothulf,
his nephew.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual,</span>
<span>True each to the other. And Unferth the spokesman</span>
<span>Sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings:</span>
<span>Each trusted his spirit that his mood was courageous,</span>
<span>Though at fight he had failed in faith to his kinsmen.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Said the queen of the Scyldings: “My lord and protector,</span>
<span>Treasure-bestower, take thou this beaker;</span>
<span>Joyance attend thee, gold-friend of heroes,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Be generous to
the Geats.</span>
<span>And greet thou the Geatmen with gracious responses!</span>
<span>So ought one to do. Be kind to the Geatmen,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>In gifts not niggardly; anear and afar now</span>
<span>Peace thou enjoyest. Report hath informed me</span>
<span>Thou’lt have for a bairn the battle-brave hero.</span>
<span>Now is Heorot cleansèd, ring-palace gleaming;</span>
<span class="sidenote">Have as much joy
as possible in thy
hall, once more
purified.</span>
<span>Give while thou mayest many rewards,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>And bequeath to thy kinsmen kingdom and people,</span>
<span>On wending thy way to the Wielder’s splendor.</span>
<span>I know good Hrothulf, that the noble young troopers</span>
<span class="sidenote">I know that Hrothulf
will prove faithful
if he survive
thee.</span>
<span>He’ll care for and honor, lord of the Scyldings,</span>
<span>If earth-joys thou endest earlier than he doth;</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>I reckon that recompense he’ll render with kindness</span>
<span>Our offspring and issue, if that all he remember,</span>
<span>What favors of yore, when he yet was an infant,</span>
<span>We awarded to him for his worship and pleasure.”</span>
<span>Then she turned by the bench where her sons were carousing,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Hrethric and Hrothmund, and the heroes’ offspring,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is sitting
by the two royal
sons.</span>
<span>The war-youth together; there the good one was sitting</span>
<span>’Twixt the brothers twain, Beowulf Geatman.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XVIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XVIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For 1130 (1) R. and Gr. suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">elne unflitme</span>’ as 1098 (1) reads. The
latter verse is undisputed; and, for the former, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">elne</span>’ would be as possible as
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ealles</span>,’ and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unflitme</span>’ is well supported. Accepting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">elne unflitme</span>’ for both,
I would suggest ‘<i>very peaceably</i>’ for both places: (1) <i>Finn to Hengest very
peaceably vowed with oaths</i>, etc. (2) <i>Hengest then still the slaughter-stained
winter remained there with Finn very peaceably</i>. The two passages become
thus correlatives, the second a sequel of the first. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Elne</span>,’ in the sense of very
(<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swíðe</span>), needs no argument; and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unflitme</span>’ (from ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">flítan</span>’) can, it seems to
me, be more plausibly rendered ‘peaceful,’ ‘peaceable,’ than ‘contestable,’ or
‘conquerable.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XVIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XVIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Some scholars have proposed ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">roden</span>’; the line would then read: <i>Then
the building was reddened, etc.</i>, instead of ‘covered.’ The ‘h’ may have been
carried over from the three alliterating ‘h’s.’
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XIX">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XIX">XIX.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF RECEIVES FURTHER HONOR.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">More gifts are offered
Beowulf.</span>
<span>A beaker was borne him, and bidding to quaff it</span>
<span>Graciously given, and gold that was twisted</span>
<span>Pleasantly proffered, a pair of arm-jewels,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_42">[42]</span>
<span>Rings and corslet, of collars the greatest</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>I’ve heard of ’neath heaven. Of heroes not any</span>
<span>More splendid from jewels have I heard ’neath the welkin,</span>
<span class="sidenote">A famous necklace
is referred to, in
comparison with
the gems presented
to Beowulf.</span>
<span>Since Hama off bore the Brosingmen’s necklace,</span>
<span>The bracteates and jewels, from the bright-shining city,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.1" id="XIX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Eormenric’s cunning craftiness fled from,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Chose gain everlasting. Geatish Higelac,</span>
<span>Grandson of Swerting, last had this jewel</span>
<span>When tramping ’neath banner the treasure he guarded,</span>
<span>The field-spoil defended; Fate offcarried him</span>
<span>When for deeds of daring he endured tribulation,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Hate from the Frisians; the ornaments bare he</span>
<span>O’er the cup of the currents, costly gem-treasures,</span>
<span>Mighty folk-leader, he fell ’neath his target;</span>
<span>The<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.2" id="XIX.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> corpse of the king then came into charge of</span>
<span>The race of the Frankmen, the mail-shirt and collar:</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Warmen less noble plundered the fallen,</span>
<span>When the fight was finished; the folk of the Geatmen</span>
<span>The field of the dead held in possession.</span>
<span>The choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.</span>
<span>Wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Wealhtheow
magnifies
Beowulf’s achievements.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>“This collar enjoy thou, Beowulf worthy,</span>
<span>Young man, in safety, and use thou this armor,</span>
<span>Gems of the people, and prosper thou fully,</span>
<span>Show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemen</span>
<span>Mild with instruction! I’ll mind thy requital.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Thou hast brought it to pass that far and near</span>
<span>Forever and ever earthmen shall honor thee,</span>
<span>Even so widely as ocean surroundeth</span>
<span>The blustering bluffs. Be, while thou livest,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_43">[43]</span>
<span>A wealth-blessèd atheling. I wish thee most truly</span>
<span class="sidenote">May gifts never
fail thee.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Jewels and treasure. Be kind to my son, thou</span>
<span>Living in joyance! Here each of the nobles</span>
<span>Is true unto other, gentle in spirit,</span>
<span>Loyal to leader. The liegemen are peaceful,</span>
<span>The war-troops ready: well-drunken heroes,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.3" id="XIX.FNREF.3" title="S. suggests ‘wine-joyous heroes,’ ‘warriors elated with wine.’">3</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Do as I bid ye.” Then she went to the settle.</span>
<span>There was choicest of banquets, wine drank the heroes:</span>
<span class="sidenote">They little know
of the sorrow in
store for them.</span>
<span>Weird they knew not, destiny cruel,</span>
<span>As to many an earlman early it happened,</span>
<span>When evening had come and Hrothgar had parted</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Off to his manor, the mighty to slumber.</span>
<span>Warriors unnumbered warded the building</span>
<span>As erst they did often: the ale-settle bared they,</span>
<span>’Twas covered all over with beds and pillows.</span>
<span class="sidenote">A doomed thane is
there with them.</span>
<span>Doomed unto death, down to his slumber</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Bowed then a beer-thane. Their battle-shields placed they,</span>
<span>Bright-shining targets, up by their heads then;</span>
<span>O’er the atheling on ale-bench ’twas easy to see there</span>
<span>Battle-high helmet, burnie of ring-mail,</span>
<span class="sidenote">They were always
ready for battle.</span>
<span>And mighty war-spear. ’Twas the wont of that people</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>To constantly keep them equipped for the battle,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.4" id="XIX.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span>At home or marching—in either condition—</span>
<span>At seasons just such as necessity ordered</span>
<span>As best for their ruler; that people was worthy.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> C. suggests a semicolon after ‘city,’ with ‘he’ as supplied subject of
‘fled’ and ‘chose.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feorh</span>’ S. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feoh</span>’: ‘corpse’ in the translation would then
be changed to ‘<i>possessions</i>,’ ‘<i>belongings</i>.’ This is a better reading than one
joining, in such intimate syntactical relations, things so unlike as ‘corpse’ and
‘jewels.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.3">[3]</a> S. suggests ‘<i>wine-joyous heroes</i>,’ ‘<i>warriors elated with wine</i>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.4">[4]</a> I believe this translation brings out the meaning of the poet, without
departing seriously from the H.-So. text. ‘Oft’ frequently means ‘constantly,’
‘continually,’ not always ‘often.’—Why ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">an (on) wíg gearwe</span>’ should be
written ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ánwíg-gearwe</span>’ (= ready for single combat), I cannot see. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Gearwe</span>’
occurs quite frequently with ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on</span>’; cf. B. 1110 (<i>ready for the pyre</i>), El. 222
(<i>ready for the glad journey</i>). Moreover, what has the idea of single combat
to do with B. 1247 ff.? The poet is giving an inventory of the arms and
armor which they lay aside on retiring, and he closes his narration by saying
that they were <i>always prepared for battle both at home and on the march</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XX">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_44">[44]</span>
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XX">XX.</a></h2><h2>THE MOTHER OF GRENDEL.</h2>
<span>They sank then to slumber. With sorrow one paid for</span>
<span>His evening repose, as often betid them</span>
<span>While Grendel was holding<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.1" id="XX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> the gold-bedecked palace,</span>
<span>Ill-deeds performing, till his end overtook him,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Death for his sins. ’Twas seen very clearly,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s mother
is known to be
thirsting for revenge.</span>
<span>Known unto earth-folk, that still an avenger</span>
<span>Outlived the loathed one, long since the sorrow</span>
<span>Caused by the struggle; the mother of Grendel,</span>
<span>Devil-shaped woman, her woe ever minded,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Who was held to inhabit the horrible waters,</span>
<span class="sidenote">[Grendel’s progenitor,
Cain, is again
referred to.]</span>
<span>The cold-flowing currents, after Cain had become a</span>
<span>Slayer-with-edges to his one only brother,</span>
<span>The son of his sire; he set out then banished,</span>
<span>Marked as a murderer, man-joys avoiding,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Lived in the desert. Thence demons unnumbered</span>
<span class="sidenote">The poet again
magnifies Beowulf’s
valor.</span>
<span>Fate-sent awoke; one of them Grendel,</span>
<span>Sword-cursèd, hateful, who at Heorot met with</span>
<span>A man that was watching, waiting the struggle,</span>
<span>Where a horrid one held him with hand-grapple sturdy;</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Nathless he minded the might of his body,</span>
<span>The glorious gift God had allowed him,</span>
<span>And folk-ruling Father’s favor relied on,</span>
<span>His help and His comfort: so he conquered the foeman,</span>
<span>The hell-spirit humbled: he unhappy departed then,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Reaved of his joyance, journeying to death-haunts,</span>
<span>Foeman of man. His mother moreover</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s mother
comes to avenge
her son.</span>
<span>Eager and gloomy was anxious to go on</span>
<span>Her mournful mission, mindful of vengeance</span>
<span>For the death of her son. She came then to Heorot</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_45">[45]</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Where the Armor-Dane earlmen all through the building</span>
<span>Were lying in slumber. Soon there became then</span>
<span>Return<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.2" id="XX.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> to the nobles, when the mother of Grendel</span>
<span>Entered the folk-hall; the fear was less grievous</span>
<span>By even so much as the vigor of maidens,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>War-strength of women, by warrior is reckoned,</span>
<span>When well-carved weapon, worked with the hammer,</span>
<span>Blade very bloody, brave with its edges,</span>
<span>Strikes down the boar-sign that stands on the helmet.</span>
<span>Then the hard-edgèd weapon was heaved in the building,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.3" id="XX.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>The brand o’er the benches, broad-lindens many</span>
<span>Hand-fast were lifted; for helmet he recked not,</span>
<span>For armor-net broad, whom terror laid hold of.</span>
<span>She went then hastily, outward would get her</span>
<span>Her life for to save, when some one did spy her;</span>
<span class="sidenote">She seizes a favorite
liegemen of
Hrothgar’s.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Soon she had grappled one of the athelings</span>
<span>Fast and firmly, when fenward she hied her;</span>
<span>That one to Hrothgar was liefest of heroes</span>
<span>In rank of retainer where waters encircle,</span>
<span>A mighty shield-warrior, whom she murdered at slumber,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>A broadly-famed battle-knight. Beowulf was absent,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf was asleep
in another part of
the palace.</span>
<span>But another apartment was erstwhile devoted</span>
<span>To the glory-decked Geatman when gold was distributed.</span>
<span>There was hubbub in Heorot. The hand that was famous</span>
<span>She grasped in its gore;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.4" id="XX.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> grief was renewed then</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_46">[46]</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>In homes and houses: ’twas no happy arrangement</span>
<span>In both of the quarters to barter and purchase</span>
<span>With lives of their friends. Then the well-agèd ruler,</span>
<span>The gray-headed war-thane, was woful in spirit,</span>
<span>When his long-trusted liegeman lifeless he knew of,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is sent
for.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>His dearest one gone. Quick from a room was</span>
<span>Beowulf brought, brave and triumphant.</span>
<span>As day was dawning in the dusk of the morning,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He comes at
Hrothgar’s summons.</span>
<span>Went then that earlman, champion noble,</span>
<span>Came with comrades, where the clever one bided</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Whether God all gracious would grant him a respite</span>
<span>After the woe he had suffered. The war-worthy hero</span>
<span>With a troop of retainers trod then the pavement</span>
<span>(The hall-building groaned), till he greeted the wise one,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf inquires
how Hrothgar had
enjoyed his night’s
rest.</span>
<span>The earl of the Ingwins;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.5" id="XX.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> asked if the night had</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>Fully refreshed him, as fain he would have it.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Several eminent authorities either read or emend the MS. so as to make
this verse read, <i>While Grendel was wasting the gold-bedecked palace</i>. So <a href="#L.XX.15">20 <span class="smaller">15</span></a>
below: <i>ravaged the desert</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sóna</span>’ (1281), t.B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sára</span>,’ limiting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edhwyrft</span>.’ Read then:
<i>Return of sorrows to the nobles, etc</i>. This emendation supplies the syntactical
gap after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edhwyrft</span>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Some authorities follow Grein’s lexicon in treating ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">heard ecg</span>’ as an adj.
limiting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sweord</span>’: H.-So. renders it as a subst. (So v. 1491.) The sense of
the translation would be the same.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.4">[4]</a> B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under hróf genam</span>’ (v. 1303). This emendation, as well as
an emendation with (?) to v. 739, he offers, because ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under</span>’ baffles him in
both passages. All we need is to take ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under</span>’ in its secondary meaning of
‘in,’ which, though not given by Grein, occurs in the literature. Cf. Chron.
876 (March’s A.-S. Gram. § 355) and Oro. Amaz. I. 10, where ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under</span>’ = <i>in
the midst of</i>. Cf. modern Eng. ‘in such circumstances,’ which interchanges
in good usage with ‘under such circumstances.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.5">[5]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">néod-laðu</span>’ (1321) C. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">néad-láðum</span>,’ and translates: <i>asked
whether the night had been pleasant to him after crushing-hostility</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXI">XXI.</a></h2><h2>HROTHGAR’S ACCOUNT OF THE MONSTERS.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar laments
the death of Æschere,
his shoulder-companion.</span>
<span>Hrothgar rejoined, helm of the Scyldings:</span>
<span>“Ask not of joyance! Grief is renewed to</span>
<span>The folk of the Danemen. Dead is Æschere,</span>
<span>Yrmenlaf’s brother, older than he,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>My true-hearted counsellor, trusty adviser,</span>
<span>Shoulder-companion, when fighting in battle</span>
<span>Our heads we protected, when troopers were clashing,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He was my ideal
hero.</span>
<span>And heroes were dashing; such an earl should be ever,</span>
<span>An erst-worthy atheling, as Æschere proved him.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>The flickering death-spirit became in Heorot</span>
<span>His hand-to-hand murderer; I can not tell whither</span>
<span>The cruel one turned in the carcass exulting,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_47">[47]</span>
<span class="sidenote">This horrible
creature came to
avenge Grendel’s
death.</span>
<span>By cramming discovered.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.1" id="XXI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> The quarrel she wreaked then,</span>
<span>That last night igone Grendel thou killedst</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>In grewsomest manner, with grim-holding clutches,</span>
<span>Since too long he had lessened my liege-troop and wasted</span>
<span>My folk-men so foully. He fell in the battle</span>
<span>With forfeit of life, and another has followed,</span>
<span>A mighty crime-worker, her kinsman avenging,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>And henceforth hath ‘stablished her hatred unyielding,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.2" id="XXI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>As it well may appear to many a liegeman,</span>
<span>Who mourneth in spirit the treasure-bestower,</span>
<span>Her heavy heart-sorrow; the hand is now lifeless</span>
<span>Which<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.3" id="XXI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> availed you in every wish that you cherished.</span>
<span class="sidenote">I have heard my
vassals speak of
these two uncanny
monsters who lived
in the moors.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Land-people heard I, liegemen, this saying,</span>
<span>Dwellers in halls, they had seen very often</span>
<span>A pair of such mighty march-striding creatures,</span>
<span>Far-dwelling spirits, holding the moorlands:</span>
<span>One of them wore, as well they might notice,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>The image of woman, the other one wretched</span>
<span>In guise of a man wandered in exile,</span>
<span>Except he was huger than any of earthmen;</span>
<span>Earth-dwelling people entitled him Grendel</span>
<span>In days of yore: they know not their father,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Whe’r ill-going spirits any were borne him</span>
<span class="sidenote">The inhabit the
most desolate and
horrible places.</span>
<span>Ever before. They guard the wolf-coverts,</span>
<span>Lands inaccessible, wind-beaten nesses,</span>
<span>Fearfullest fen-deeps, where a flood from the mountains</span>
<span>’Neath mists of the nesses netherward rattles,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>The stream under earth: not far is it henceward</span>
<span>Measured by mile-lengths that the mere-water standeth,</span>
<span>Which forests hang over, with frost-whiting covered,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.4" id="XXI.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_48">[48]</span>
<span>A firm-rooted forest, the floods overshadow.</span>
<span>There ever at night one an ill-meaning portent</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>A fire-flood may see; ’mong children of men</span>
<span>None liveth so wise that wot of the bottom;</span>
<span>Though harassed by hounds the heath-stepper seek for,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Even the hounded
deer will not seek
refuge in these uncanny
regions.</span>
<span>Fly to the forest, firm-antlered he-deer,</span>
<span>Spurred from afar, his spirit he yieldeth,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>His life on the shore, ere in he will venture</span>
<span>To cover his head. Uncanny the place is:</span>
<span>Thence upward ascendeth the surging of waters,</span>
<span>Wan to the welkin, when the wind is stirring</span>
<span>The weathers unpleasing, till the air groweth gloomy,</span>
<span class="sidenote">To thee only can I
look for assistance.</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>And the heavens lower. Now is help to be gotten</span>
<span>From thee and thee only! The abode thou know’st not,</span>
<span>The dangerous place where thou’rt able to meet with</span>
<span>The sin-laden hero: seek if thou darest!</span>
<span>For the feud I will fully fee thee with money,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>With old-time treasure, as erstwhile I did thee,</span>
<span>With well-twisted jewels, if away thou shalt get thee.”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrægnod</span>’ (1334), K. and t.B. suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefægnod</span>,’ rendering
‘<i>rejoicing in her fill</i>.’ This gives a parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">æse wlanc</span>’ (1333).
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The line ‘And … yielding,’ B. renders: <i>And she has performed a deed
of blood-vengeance whose effect is far-reaching</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sé Þe</span>’ (1345) is an instance of masc. rel. with fem. antecedent. So
v. 1888, where ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sé Þe</span>’ refers to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">yldo</span>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.4">[4]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hrímge</span>’ in the H.-So. edition, Gr. and others read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hrínde</span>’
(=<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hrínende</span>), and translate: <i>which rustling forests overhang</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXII">XXII.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF SEEKS GRENDEL’S MOTHER.</h2>
<span>Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow’s son:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf exhorts
the old king to
arouse himself for
action.</span>
<span>“Grieve not, O wise one! for each it is better,</span>
<span>His friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him;</span>
<span>Each of us must the end-day abide of</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>His earthly existence; who is able accomplish</span>
<span>Glory ere death! To battle-thane noble</span>
<span>Lifeless lying, ’tis at last most fitting.</span>
<span>Arise, O king, quick let us hasten</span>
<span>To look at the footprint of the kinsman of Grendel!</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>I promise thee this now: to his place he’ll escape not,</span>
<span>To embrace of the earth, nor to mountainous forest,</span>
<span>Nor to depths of the ocean, wherever he wanders.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_49">[49]</span>
<span>Practice thou now patient endurance</span>
<span>Of each of thy sorrows, as I hope for thee soothly!”</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar rouses
himself. His horse
is brought.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Then up sprang the old one, the All-Wielder thanked he,</span>
<span>Ruler Almighty, that the man had outspoken.</span>
<span>Then for Hrothgar a war-horse was decked with a bridle,</span>
<span>Curly-maned courser. The clever folk-leader</span>
<span class="sidenote">They start on the
track of the female
monster.</span>
<span>Stately proceeded: stepped then an earl-troop</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Of linden-wood bearers. Her footprints were seen then</span>
<span>Widely in wood-paths, her way o’er the bottoms,</span>
<span>Where she faraway fared o’er fen-country murky,</span>
<span>Bore away breathless the best of retainers</span>
<span>Who pondered with Hrothgar the welfare of country.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The son of the athelings then went o’er the stony,</span>
<span>Declivitous cliffs, the close-covered passes,</span>
<span>Narrow passages, paths unfrequented,</span>
<span>Nesses abrupt, nicker-haunts many;</span>
<span>One of a few of wise-mooded heroes,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>He onward advanced to view the surroundings,</span>
<span>Till he found unawares woods of the mountain</span>
<span>O’er hoar-stones hanging, holt-wood unjoyful;</span>
<span>The water stood under, welling and gory.</span>
<span>’Twas irksome in spirit to all of the Danemen,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Friends of the Scyldings, to many a liegeman</span>
<span class="sidenote">The sight of
Æschere’s head
causes them great
sorrow.</span>
<span>Sad to be suffered, a sorrow unlittle</span>
<span>To each of the earlmen, when to Æschere’s head they</span>
<span>Came on the cliff. The current was seething</span>
<span>With blood and with gore (the troopers gazed on it).</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>The horn anon sang the battle-song ready.</span>
<span>The troop were all seated; they saw ’long the water then</span>
<span class="sidenote">The water is filled
with serpents and
sea-dragons.</span>
<span>Many a serpent, mere-dragons wondrous</span>
<span>Trying the waters, nickers a-lying</span>
<span>On the cliffs of the nesses, which at noonday full often</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Go on the sea-deeps their sorrowful journey,</span>
<span>Wild-beasts and wormkind; away then they hastened</span>
<span class="sidenote">One of them is
killed by Beowulf.</span>
<span>Hot-mooded, hateful, they heard the great clamor,</span>
<span>The war-trumpet winding. One did the Geat-prince</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_50">[50]</span>
<span>Sunder from earth-joys, with arrow from bowstring,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>From his sea-struggle tore him, that the trusty war-missile</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dead beast is a
poor swimmer</span>
<span>Pierced to his vitals; he proved in the currents</span>
<span>Less doughty at swimming whom death had offcarried.</span>
<span>Soon in the waters the wonderful swimmer</span>
<span>Was straitened most sorely with sword-pointed boar-spears,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Pressed in the battle and pulled to the cliff-edge;</span>
<span>The liegemen then looked on the loath-fashioned stranger.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf prepares
for a struggle with
the monster.</span>
<span>Beowulf donned then his battle-equipments,</span>
<span>Cared little for life; inlaid and most ample,</span>
<span>The hand-woven corslet which could cover his body,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Must the wave-deeps explore, that war might be powerless</span>
<span>To harm the great hero, and the hating one’s grasp might</span>
<span>Not peril his safety; his head was protected</span>
<span>By the light-flashing helmet that should mix with the bottoms,</span>
<span>Trying the eddies, treasure-emblazoned,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Encircled with jewels, as in seasons long past</span>
<span>The weapon-smith worked it, wondrously made it,</span>
<span>With swine-bodies fashioned it, that thenceforward no longer</span>
<span>Brand might bite it, and battle-sword hurt it.</span>
<span>And that was not least of helpers in prowess</span>
<span class="sidenote">He has Unferth’s
sword in his hand.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>That Hrothgar’s spokesman had lent him when straitened;</span>
<span>And the hilted hand-sword was Hrunting entitled,</span>
<span>Old and most excellent ’mong all of the treasures;</span>
<span>Its blade was of iron, blotted with poison,</span>
<span>Hardened with gore; it failed not in battle</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>Any hero under heaven in hand who it brandished,</span>
<span>Who ventured to take the terrible journeys,</span>
<span>The battle-field sought; not the earliest occasion</span>
<span>That deeds of daring ’twas destined to ’complish.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Unferth has little
use for swords.</span>
<span>Ecglaf’s kinsman minded not soothly,</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Exulting in strength, what erst he had spoken</span>
<span>Drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent to</span>
<span>A sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture</span>
<span>’Neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_51">[51]</span>
<span>To fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Repute for his strength. Not so with the other</span>
<span>When he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXIII">XXIII.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF’S FIGHT WITH GRENDEL’S MOTHER.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf makes a
parting speech to
Hrothgar.</span>
<span>Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s son:</span>
<span>“Recall now, oh, famous kinsman of Healfdene,</span>
<span>Prince very prudent, now to part I am ready,</span>
<span>Gold-friend of earlmen, what erst we agreed on,</span>
<span class="sidenote">If I fail, act as a
kind liegelord to
my thanes,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Should I lay down my life in lending thee assistance,</span>
<span>When my earth-joys were over, thou wouldst evermore serve me</span>
<span>In stead of a father; my faithful thanemen,</span>
<span>My trusty retainers, protect thou and care for,</span>
<span>Fall I in battle: and, Hrothgar belovèd,</span>
<span class="sidenote">and send Higelac
the jewels thou
hast given me</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Send unto Higelac the high-valued jewels</span>
<span>Thou to me hast allotted. The lord of the Geatmen</span>
<span>May perceive from the gold, the Hrethling may see it</span>
<span class="sidenote">I should like my
king to know how
generous a lord I
found thee to be.</span>
<span>When he looks on the jewels, that a gem-giver found I</span>
<span>Good over-measure, enjoyed him while able.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>And the ancient heirloom Unferth permit thou,</span>
<span>The famed one to have, the heavy-sword splendid<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>The hard-edgèd weapon; with Hrunting to aid me,</span>
<span>I shall gain me glory, or grim-death shall take me.”</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is eager
for the fray.</span>
<span>The atheling of Geatmen uttered these words and</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Heroic did hasten, not any rejoinder</span>
<span>Was willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowed</span>
<span class="sidenote">He is a whole day
reaching the bottom
of the sea.</span>
<span>The doughty-in-battle. Then a day’s-length elapsed ere</span>
<span>He was able to see the sea at its bottom.</span>
<span>Early she found then who fifty of winters</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The course of the currents kept in her fury,</span>
<span>Grisly and greedy, that the grim one’s dominion</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_52">[52]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s mother
knows that some
one has reached
her domains.</span>
<span>Some one of men from above was exploring.</span>
<span>Forth did she grab them, grappled the warrior</span>
<span>With horrible clutches; yet no sooner she injured</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>His body unscathèd: the burnie out-guarded,</span>
<span>That she proved but powerless to pierce through the armor,</span>
<span>The limb-mail locked, with loath-grabbing fingers.</span>
<span>The sea-wolf bare then, when bottomward came she,</span>
<span class="sidenote">She grabs him,
and bears him to
her den.</span>
<span>The ring-prince homeward, that he after was powerless</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>(He had daring to do it) to deal with his weapons,</span>
<span>But many a mere-beast tormented him swimming,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Sea-monsters bite
and strike him.</span>
<span>Flood-beasts no few with fierce-biting tusks did</span>
<span>Break through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.</span>
<span>The earl then discovered he was down in some cavern</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Where no water whatever anywise harmed him,</span>
<span>And the clutch of the current could come not anear him,</span>
<span>Since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleaming</span>
<span>Fire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.</span>
<span>The good one saw then the sea-bottom’s monster,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf attacks
the mother of
Grendel.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>The mighty mere-woman; he made a great onset</span>
<span>With weapon-of-battle, his hand not desisted</span>
<span>From striking, that war-blade struck on her head then</span>
<span>A battle-song greedy. The stranger perceived then</span>
<span class="sidenote">The sword will not
bite.</span>
<span>The sword would not bite, her life would not injure,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>But the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened:</span>
<span>Erst had it often onsets encountered,</span>
<span>Oft cloven the helmet, the fated one’s armor:</span>
<span>’Twas the first time that ever the excellent jewel</span>
<span>Had failed of its fame. Firm-mooded after,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Not heedless of valor, but mindful of glory,</span>
<span>Was Higelac’s kinsman; the hero-chief angry</span>
<span>Cast then his carved-sword covered with jewels</span>
<span>That it lay on the earth, hard and steel-pointed;</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hero throws
down all weapons,
and again trusts
to his hand-grip.</span>
<span>He hoped in his strength, his hand-grapple sturdy.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>So any must act whenever he thinketh</span>
<span>To gain him in battle glory unending,</span>
<span>And is reckless of living. The lord of the War-Geats</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_53">[53]</span>
<span>(He shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>The mother of Grendel; then mighty in struggle</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled,</span>
<span>That she fell to the floor. With furious grapple</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf falls.</span>
<span>She gave him requital<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.3" id="XXIII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> early thereafter,</span>
<span>And stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriors</span>
<span>Faint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The monster sits
on him with drawn
sword.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>Foot-going champion. Then she sat on the hall-guest</span>
<span>And wielded her war-knife wide-bladed, flashing,</span>
<span>For her son would take vengeance, her one only bairn.</span>
<span class="sidenote">His armor saves
his life.</span>
<span>His breast-armor woven bode on his shoulder;</span>
<span>It guarded his life, the entrance defended</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>’Gainst sword-point and edges. Ecgtheow’s son there</span>
<span>Had fatally journeyed, champion of Geatmen,</span>
<span>In the arms of the ocean, had the armor not given,</span>
<span>Close-woven corslet, comfort and succor,</span>
<span class="sidenote">God arranged for
his escape.</span>
<span>And had God most holy not awarded the victory,</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>All-knowing Lord; easily did heaven’s</span>
<span>Ruler most righteous arrange it with justice;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.4" id="XXIII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span>Uprose he erect ready for battle.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Kl. emends ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wæl-sweord</span>.’ The half-line would then read, ‘<i>the battle-sword
splendid</i>.’—For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">heard-ecg</span>’ in next half-verse, see note to <a href="#L.XX.39">20 <span class="smaller">39</span></a> above.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Sw., R., and t.B. suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feaxe</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eaxle</span>’ (1538) and render: <i>Seized
by the hair</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> If ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hand-léan</span>’ be accepted (as the MS. has it), the line will read: <i>She
hand-reward gave him early thereafter</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> Sw. and S. change H.-So.’s semicolon (v<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> 1557) to a comma, and translate:
<i>The Ruler of Heaven arranged it in justice easily, after he arose
again</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXIV">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXIV">XXIV.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF IS DOUBLE-CONQUEROR.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf grasps a
giant-sword,</span>
<span>Then he saw mid the war-gems a weapon of victory,</span>
<span>An ancient giant-sword, of edges a-doughty,</span>
<span>Glory of warriors: of weapons ’twas choicest,</span>
<span>Only ’twas larger than any man else was</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_54">[54]</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Able to bear to the battle-encounter,</span>
<span>The good and splendid work of the giants.</span>
<span>He grasped then the sword-hilt, knight of the Scyldings,</span>
<span>Bold and battle-grim, brandished his ring-sword,</span>
<span>Hopeless of living, hotly he smote her,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>That the fiend-woman’s neck firmly it grappled,</span>
<span class="sidenote">and fells the female
monster.</span>
<span>Broke through her bone-joints, the bill fully pierced her</span>
<span>Fate-cursèd body, she fell to the ground then:</span>
<span>The hand-sword was bloody, the hero exulted.</span>
<span>The brand was brilliant, brightly it glimmered,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Just as from heaven gemlike shineth</span>
<span>The torch of the firmament. He glanced ’long the building,</span>
<span>And turned by the wall then, Higelac’s vassal</span>
<span>Raging and wrathful raised his battle-sword</span>
<span>Strong by the handle. The edge was not useless</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>To the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished to</span>
<span>Give Grendel requital for the many assaults he</span>
<span>Had worked on the West-Danes not once, but often,</span>
<span>When he slew in slumber the subjects of Hrothgar,</span>
<span>Swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Of the folk of the Danemen, and fully as many</span>
<span>Carried away, a horrible prey.</span>
<span>He gave him requital, grim-raging champion,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf sees the
body of Grendel,
and cuts off his
head.</span>
<span>When he saw on his rest-place weary of conflict</span>
<span>Grendel lying, of life-joys bereavèd,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>As the battle at Heorot erstwhile had scathed him;</span>
<span>His body far bounded, a blow when he suffered,</span>
<span>Death having seized him, sword-smiting heavy,</span>
<span>And he cut off his head then. Early this noticed</span>
<span>The clever carles who as comrades of Hrothgar</span>
<span class="sidenote">The waters are
gory.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Gazed on the sea-deeps, that the surging wave-currents</span>
<span>Were mightily mingled, the mere-flood was gory:</span>
<span>Of the good one the gray-haired together held converse,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is given
up for dead.</span>
<span>The hoary of head, that they hoped not to see again</span>
<span>The atheling ever, that exulting in victory</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>He’d return there to visit the distinguished folk-ruler:</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_55">[55]</span>
<span>Then many concluded the mere-wolf had killed him.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIV.FNDEF.1" id="XXIV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>The ninth hour came then. From the ness-edge departed</span>
<span>The bold-mooded Scyldings; the gold-friend of heroes</span>
<span>Homeward betook him. The strangers sat down then</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Soul-sick, sorrowful, the sea-waves regarding:</span>
<span>They wished and yet weened not their well-loved friend-lord</span>
<span class="sidenote">The giant-sword
melts.</span>
<span>To see any more. The sword-blade began then,</span>
<span>The blood having touched it, contracting and shriveling</span>
<span>With battle-icicles; ’twas a wonderful marvel</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>That it melted entirely, likest to ice when</span>
<span>The Father unbindeth the bond of the frost and</span>
<span>Unwindeth the wave-bands, He who wieldeth dominion</span>
<span>Of times and of tides: a truth-firm Creator.</span>
<span>Nor took he of jewels more in the dwelling,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Lord of the Weders, though they lay all around him,</span>
<span>Than the head and the handle handsome with jewels;</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_56">[56]</span>
<span>The brand early melted, burnt was the weapon:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIV.FNDEF.2" id="XXIV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>So hot was the blood, the strange-spirit poisonous</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hero swims
back to the realms
of day.</span>
<span>That in it did perish. He early swam off then</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Who had bided in combat the carnage of haters,</span>
<span>Went up through the ocean; the eddies were cleansèd,</span>
<span>The spacious expanses, when the spirit from farland</span>
<span>His life put aside and this short-lived existence.</span>
<span>The seamen’s defender came swimming to land then</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Doughty of spirit, rejoiced in his sea-gift,</span>
<span>The bulky burden which he bore in his keeping.</span>
<span>The excellent vassals advanced then to meet him,</span>
<span>To God they were grateful, were glad in their chieftain,</span>
<span>That to see him safe and sound was granted them.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>From the high-minded hero, then, helmet and burnie</span>
<span>Were speedily loosened: the ocean was putrid,</span>
<span>The water ’neath welkin weltered with gore.</span>
<span>Forth did they fare, then, their footsteps retracing,</span>
<span>Merry and mirthful, measured the earth-way,</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>The highway familiar: men very daring<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIV.FNDEF.3" id="XXIV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>Bare then the head from the sea-cliff, burdening</span>
<span>Each of the earlmen, excellent-valiant.</span>
<span class="sidenote">It takes four men
to carry Grendel’s
head on a spear.</span>
<span>Four of them had to carry with labor</span>
<span>The head of Grendel to the high towering gold-hall</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Upstuck on the spear, till fourteen most-valiant</span>
<span>And battle-brave Geatmen came there going</span>
<span>Straight to the palace: the prince of the people</span>
<span>Measured the mead-ways, their mood-brave companion.</span>
<span>The atheling of earlmen entered the building,</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Deed-valiant man, adorned with distinction,</span>
<span>Doughty shield-warrior, to address King Hrothgar:</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_57">[57]</span>
<span>Then hung by the hair, the head of Grendel</span>
<span>Was borne to the building, where beer-thanes were drinking,</span>
<span>Loth before earlmen and eke ’fore the lady:</span>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<span>The warriors beheld then a wonderful sight.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXIV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXIV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þæs monige gewearð</span>’ (1599) and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hafað þæs geworden</span>’ (2027).—In a
paper published some years ago in one of the Johns Hopkins University
circulars, I tried to throw upon these two long-doubtful passages some light
derived from a study of like passages in Alfred’s prose.—The impersonal verb
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">geweorðan</span>,’ with an accus. of the person, and a <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæt</span>-clause is used several
times with the meaning ‘agree.’ See Orosius (Sweet’s ed.) 178<sub>7</sub>; 204<sub>34</sub>;
208<sub>28</sub>; 210<sub>15</sub>; 280<sub>20</sub>. In the two Beowulf passages, the <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæt</span>-clause is anticipated
by ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæs</span>,’ which is clearly a gen. of the thing agreed on.

<p>
The first passage (v. 1599 (b)-1600) I translate literally: <i>Then many
agreed upon this (namely), that the sea-wolf had killed him</i>.
</p>
<p>
The second passage (v. 2025 (b)-2027): <i>She is promised …; to this the
friend of the Scyldings has agreed, etc</i>. By emending ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">is</span>’ instead of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wæs</span>’
(2025), the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.
</p>
<p>
In v. 1997 ff. this same idiom occurs, and was noticed in B.’s great
article on Beowulf, which appeared about the time I published my reading
of 1599 and 2027. Translate 1997 then: <i>Wouldst let the South-Danes themselves
decide about their struggle with Grendel</i>. Here ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Súð-Dene</span>’ is accus.
of person, and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúðe</span>’ is gen. of thing agreed on.
</p>
<p>
With such collateral support as that afforded by B. (P. and B. XII. 97), I
have no hesitation in departing from H.-So., my usual guide.
</p>
<p>
The idiom above treated runs through A.-S., Old Saxon, and other Teutonic
languages, and should be noticed in the lexicons.
</p>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXIV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Bróden-mæl</span>’ is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeened
sword. Translate: <i>The damaskeened sword burned up</i>. Cf. <a href="#L.XXV.16">25 <span class="smaller">16</span></a> and note.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXIV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Cyning-balde</span>’ (1635) is the much-disputed reading of K. and Th. To
render this, “<i>nobly bold</i>,” “<i>excellently bold</i>,” have been suggested. B. would
read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cyning-holde</span>’ (cf. 290), and render: <i>Men well-disposed towards the
king carried the head, etc.</i> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Cynebealde</span>,’ says t.B., endorsing Gr.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXV">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXV">XXV.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF BRINGS HIS TROPHIES.—HROTHGAR’S GRATITUDE.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf relates his
last exploit.</span>
<span>Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:</span>
<span>“Lo! we blithely have brought thee, bairn of Healfdene,</span>
<span>Prince of the Scyldings, these presents from ocean</span>
<span>Which thine eye looketh on, for an emblem of glory.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>I came off alive from this, narrowly ’scaping:</span>
<span>In war ’neath the water the work with great pains I</span>
<span>Performed, and the fight had been finished quite nearly,</span>
<span>Had God not defended me. I failed in the battle</span>
<span>Aught to accomplish, aided by Hrunting,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Though that weapon was worthy, but the Wielder of earth-folk</span>
<span class="sidenote">God was fighting
with me.</span>
<span>Gave me willingly to see on the wall a</span>
<span>Heavy old hand-sword hanging in splendor</span>
<span>(He guided most often the lorn and the friendless),</span>
<span>That I swung as a weapon. The wards of the house then</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>I killed in the conflict (when occasion was given me).</span>
<span>Then the battle-sword burned, the brand that was lifted,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXV.FNDEF.1" id="XXV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>As the blood-current sprang, hottest of war-sweats;</span>
<span>Seizing the hilt, from my foes I offbore it;</span>
<span>I avenged as I ought to their acts of malignity,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>The murder of Danemen. I then make thee this promise,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Heorot is freed
from monsters.</span>
<span>Thou’lt be able in Heorot careless to slumber</span>
<span>With thy throng of heroes and the thanes of thy people</span>
<span>Every and each, of greater and lesser,</span>
<span>And thou needest not fear for them from the selfsame direction</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>As thou formerly fearedst, oh, folk-lord of Scyldings,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_58">[58]</span>
<span>End-day for earlmen.” To the age-hoary man then,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The famous sword
is presented to
Hrothgar.</span>
<span>The gray-haired chieftain, the gold-fashioned sword-hilt,</span>
<span>Old-work of giants, was thereupon given;</span>
<span>Since the fall of the fiends, it fell to the keeping</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Of the wielder of Danemen, the wonder-smith’s labor,</span>
<span>And the bad-mooded being abandoned this world then,</span>
<span>Opponent of God, victim of murder,</span>
<span>And also his mother; it went to the keeping</span>
<span>Of the best of the world-kings, where waters encircle,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Who the scot divided in Scylding dominion.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar looks
closely at the old
sword.</span>
<span>Hrothgar discoursed, the hilt he regarded,</span>
<span>The ancient heirloom where an old-time contention’s</span>
<span>Beginning was graven: the gurgling currents,</span>
<span>The flood slew thereafter the race of the giants,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>They had proved themselves daring: that people was loth to</span>
<span class="sidenote">It had belonged to
a race hateful to
God.</span>
<span>The Lord everlasting, through lash of the billows</span>
<span>The Father gave them final requital.</span>
<span>So in letters of rune on the clasp of the handle</span>
<span>Gleaming and golden, ’twas graven exactly,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Set forth and said, whom that sword had been made for,</span>
<span>Finest of irons, who first it was wrought for,</span>
<span>Wreathed at its handle and gleaming with serpents.</span>
<span>The wise one then said (silent they all were)</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar praises
Beowulf.</span>
<span>Son of old Healfdene: “He may say unrefuted</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Who performs ’mid the folk-men fairness and truth</span>
<span>(The hoary old ruler remembers the past),</span>
<span>That better by birth is this bairn of the nobles!</span>
<span>Thy fame is extended through far-away countries,</span>
<span>Good friend Beowulf, o’er all of the races,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Thou holdest all firmly, hero-like strength with</span>
<span>Prudence of spirit. I’ll prove myself grateful</span>
<span>As before we agreed on; thou granted for long shalt</span>
<span>Become a great comfort to kinsmen and comrades,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Heremod’s career
is again contrasted
with Beowulf’s.</span>
<span>A help unto heroes. Heremod became not</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Such to the Scyldings, successors of Ecgwela;</span>
<span>He grew not to please them, but grievous destruction,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_59">[59]</span>
<span>And diresome death-woes to Danemen attracted;</span>
<span>He slew in anger his table-companions,</span>
<span>Trustworthy counsellors, till he turned off lonely</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>From world-joys away, wide-famous ruler:</span>
<span>Though high-ruling heaven in hero-strength raised him,</span>
<span>In might exalted him, o’er men of all nations</span>
<span>Made him supreme, yet a murderous spirit</span>
<span>Grew in his bosom: he gave then no ring-gems</span>
<span class="sidenote">A wretched failure
of a king, to give
no jewels to his
retainers.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>To the Danes after custom; endured he unjoyful</span>
<span>Standing the straits from strife that was raging,</span>
<span>Longsome folk-sorrow. Learn then from this,</span>
<span>Lay hold of virtue! Though laden with winters,</span>
<span>I have sung thee these measures. ’Tis a marvel to tell it,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar moralizes.</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>How all-ruling God from greatness of spirit</span>
<span>Giveth wisdom to children of men,</span>
<span>Manor and earlship: all things He ruleth.</span>
<span>He often permitteth the mood-thought of man of</span>
<span>The illustrious lineage to lean to possessions,</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Allows him earthly delights at his manor,</span>
<span>A high-burg of heroes to hold in his keeping,</span>
<span>Maketh portions of earth-folk hear him,</span>
<span>And a wide-reaching kingdom so that, wisdom failing him,</span>
<span>He himself is unable to reckon its boundaries;</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>He liveth in luxury, little debars him,</span>
<span>Nor sickness nor age, no treachery-sorrow</span>
<span>Becloudeth his spirit, conflict nowhere,</span>
<span>No sword-hate, appeareth, but all of the world doth</span>
<span>Wend as he wisheth; the worse he knoweth not,</span>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<span>Till arrant arrogance inward pervading,</span>
<span>Waxeth and springeth, when the warder is sleeping,</span>
<span>The guard of the soul: with sorrows encompassed,</span>
<span>Too sound is his slumber, the slayer is near him,</span>
<span>Who with bow and arrow aimeth in malice.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_60">[60]</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Or rather, perhaps, ‘<i>the inlaid, or damaskeened weapon</i>.’ Cf. <a href="#L.XXIV.57">24 <span class="smaller">57</span></a> and
note.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXVI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXVI">XXVI.</a></h2><h2>HROTHGAR MORALIZES.—REST AFTER LABOR.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">A wounded spirit.</span>
<span>“Then bruised in his bosom he with bitter-toothed missile</span>
<span>Is hurt ’neath his helmet: from harmful pollution</span>
<span>He is powerless to shield him by the wonderful mandates</span>
<span>Of the loath-cursèd spirit; what too long he hath holden</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Him seemeth too small, savage he hoardeth,</span>
<span>Nor boastfully giveth gold-plated rings,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVI.FNDEF.1" id="XXVI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>The fate of the future flouts and forgetteth</span>
<span>Since God had erst given him greatness no little,</span>
<span>Wielder of Glory. His end-day anear,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>It afterward happens that the bodily-dwelling</span>
<span>Fleetingly fadeth, falls into ruins;</span>
<span>Another lays hold who doleth the ornaments,</span>
<span>The nobleman’s jewels, nothing lamenting,</span>
<span>Heedeth no terror. Oh, Beowulf dear,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Best of the heroes, from bale-strife defend thee,</span>
<span>And choose thee the better, counsels eternal;</span>
<span class="sidenote">Be not over proud:
life is fleeting, and
its strength soon
wasteth away.</span>
<span>Beware of arrogance, world-famous champion!</span>
<span>But a little-while lasts thy life-vigor’s fulness;</span>
<span>’Twill after hap early, that illness or sword-edge</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Shall part thee from strength, or the grasp of the fire,</span>
<span>Or the wave of the current, or clutch of the edges,</span>
<span>Or flight of the war-spear, or age with its horrors,</span>
<span>Or thine eyes’ bright flashing shall fade into darkness:</span>
<span>’Twill happen full early, excellent hero,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar gives an
account of his
reign.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>That death shall subdue thee. So the Danes a half-century</span>
<span>I held under heaven, helped them in struggles</span>
<span>’Gainst many a race in middle-earth’s regions,</span>
<span>With ash-wood and edges, that enemies none</span>
<span>On earth molested me. Lo! offsetting change, now,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_61">[61]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Sorrow after joy.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Came to my manor, grief after joyance,</span>
<span>When Grendel became my constant visitor,</span>
<span>Inveterate hater: I from that malice</span>
<span>Continually travailed with trouble no little.</span>
<span>Thanks be to God that I gained in my lifetime,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>To the Lord everlasting, to look on the gory</span>
<span>Head with mine eyes, after long-lasting sorrow!</span>
<span>Go to the bench now, battle-adornèd</span>
<span>Joy in the feasting: of jewels in common</span>
<span>We’ll meet with many when morning appeareth.”</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>The Geatman was gladsome, ganged he immediately</span>
<span>To go to the bench, as the clever one bade him.</span>
<span>Then again as before were the famous-for-prowess,</span>
<span>Hall-inhabiters, handsomely banqueted,</span>
<span>Feasted anew. The night-veil fell then</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Dark o’er the warriors. The courtiers rose then;</span>
<span>The gray-haired was anxious to go to his slumbers,</span>
<span>The hoary old Scylding. Hankered the Geatman,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is fagged,
and seeks rest.</span>
<span>The champion doughty, greatly, to rest him:</span>
<span>An earlman early outward did lead him,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Fagged from his faring, from far-country springing,</span>
<span>Who for etiquette’s sake all of a liegeman’s</span>
<span>Needs regarded, such as seamen at that time</span>
<span>Were bounden to feel. The big-hearted rested;</span>
<span>The building uptowered, spacious and gilded,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>The guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad raven</span>
<span>Blithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.</span>
<span>Then the bright-shining sun o’er the bottoms came going;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVI.FNDEF.2" id="XXVI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>The warriors hastened, the heads of the peoples</span>
<span>Were ready to go again to their peoples,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The Geats prepare
to leave Dane-land.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>The high-mooded farer would faraway thenceward</span>
<span>Look for his vessel. The valiant one bade then,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVI.FNDEF.3" id="XXVI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_62">[62]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Unferth asks Beowulf
to accept his
sword as a gift.
Beowulf thanks
him.</span>
<span>Offspring of Ecglaf, off to bear Hrunting,</span>
<span>To take his weapon, his well-beloved iron;</span>
<span>He him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>The war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words then</span>
<span>The blade of the brand: ’twas a brave-mooded hero.</span>
<span>When the warriors were ready, arrayed in their trappings,</span>
<span>The atheling dear to the Danemen advanced then</span>
<span>On to the dais, where the other was sitting,</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>Grim-mooded hero, greeted King Hrothgar.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXVI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXVI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> K. says ‘<i>proudly giveth</i>.’—Gr. says, ‘<i>And gives no gold-plated rings, in
order to incite the recipient to boastfulness</i>.’—B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gyld</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gylp</span>,’
and renders: <i>And gives no beaten rings for reward</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXVI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> If S.’s emendation be accepted, v. 57 will read: <i>Then came the light,
going bright after darkness: the warriors, etc</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXVI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> As the passage stands in H.-So., Unferth presents Beowulf with the sword
Hrunting, and B. thanks him for the gift. If, however, the suggestions of Grdtvg.
and M. be accepted, the passage will read: <i>Then the brave one (</i>i.e.<i> Beowulf)
commanded that Hrunting be borne to the son of Ecglaf (Unferth), bade him
take his sword, his dear weapon; he (B.) thanked him (U.) for the loan, etc</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXVII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXVII">XXVII.</a></h2><h2>SORROW AT PARTING.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s farewell.</span>
<span>Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s offspring:</span>
<span>“We men of the water wish to declare now</span>
<span>Fared from far-lands, we’re firmly determined</span>
<span>To seek King Higelac. Here have we fitly</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Been welcomed and feasted, as heart would desire it;</span>
<span>Good was the greeting. If greater affection</span>
<span>I am anywise able ever on earth to</span>
<span>Gain at thy hands, ruler of heroes,</span>
<span>Than yet I have done, I shall quickly be ready</span>
<span class="sidenote">I shall be ever
ready to aid thee.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>For combat and conflict. O’er the course of the waters</span>
<span>Learn I that neighbors alarm thee with terror,</span>
<span>As haters did whilom, I hither will bring thee</span>
<span>For help unto heroes henchmen by thousands.</span>
<span class="sidenote">My liegelord will
encourage me in
aiding thee.</span>
<span>I know as to Higelac, the lord of the Geatmen,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Though young in years, he yet will permit me,</span>
<span>By words and by works, ward of the people,</span>
<span>Fully to furnish thee forces and bear thee</span>
<span>My lance to relieve thee, if liegemen shall fail thee,</span>
<span>And help of my hand-strength; if Hrethric be treating,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_63">[63]</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Bairn of the king, at the court of the Geatmen,</span>
<span>He thereat may find him friends in abundance:</span>
<span>Faraway countries he were better to seek for</span>
<span>Who trusts in himself.” Hrothgar discoursed then,</span>
<span>Making rejoinder: “These words thou hast uttered</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>All-knowing God hath given thy spirit!</span>
<span class="sidenote">O Beowulf, thou
art wise beyond
thy years.</span>
<span>Ne’er heard I an earlman thus early in life</span>
<span>More clever in speaking: thou’rt cautious of spirit,</span>
<span>Mighty of muscle, in mouth-answers prudent.</span>
<span>I count on the hope that, happen it ever</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>That missile shall rob thee of Hrethel’s descendant,</span>
<span>Edge-horrid battle, and illness or weapon</span>
<span>Deprive thee of prince, of people’s protector,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Should Higelac
die, the Geats
could find no better
successor than
thou wouldst make.</span>
<span>And life thou yet holdest, the Sea-Geats will never</span>
<span>Find a more fitting folk-lord to choose them,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Gem-ward of heroes, than <i>thou</i> mightest prove thee,</span>
<span>If the kingdom of kinsmen thou carest to govern.</span>
<span>Thy mood-spirit likes me the longer the better,</span>
<span>Beowulf dear: thou hast brought it to pass that</span>
<span>To both these peoples peace shall be common,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Thou hast healed
the ancient breach
between our races.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>To Geat-folk and Danemen, the strife be suspended,</span>
<span>The secret assailings they suffered in yore-days;</span>
<span>And also that jewels be shared while I govern</span>
<span>The wide-stretching kingdom, and that many shall visit</span>
<span>Others o’er the ocean with excellent gift-gems:</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>The ring-adorned bark shall bring o’er the currents</span>
<span>Presents and love-gifts. This people I know</span>
<span>Tow’rd foeman and friend firmly established,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVII.FNDEF.1" id="XXVII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>After ancient etiquette everywise blameless.”</span>
<span>Then the warden of earlmen gave him still farther,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Parting gifts</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Kinsman of Healfdene, a dozen of jewels,</span>
<span>Bade him safely seek with the presents</span>
<span>His well-beloved people, early returning.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_64">[64]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar kisses
Beowulf, and
weeps.</span>
<span>Then the noble-born king kissed the distinguished,</span>
<span>Dear-lovèd liegeman, the Dane-prince saluted him,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>And claspèd his neck; tears from him fell,</span>
<span>From the gray-headed man: he two things expected,</span>
<span>Agèd and reverend, but rather the second,</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVII.FNDEF.2" id="XXVII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>That bold in council they’d meet thereafter.</span>
<span>The man was so dear that he failed to suppress the</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Emotions that moved him, but in mood-fetters fastened</span>
<span class="sidenote">The old king is
deeply grieved to
part with his benefactor.</span>
<span>The long-famous hero longeth in secret</span>
<span>Deep in his spirit for the dear-beloved man</span>
<span>Though not a blood-kinsman. Beowulf thenceward,</span>
<span>Gold-splendid warrior, walked o’er the meadows</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Exulting in treasure: the sea-going vessel</span>
<span>Riding at anchor awaited its owner.</span>
<span>As they pressed on their way then, the present of Hrothgar</span>
<span class="sidenote">Giving liberally is
the true proof of
kingship.</span>
<span>Was frequently referred to: a folk-king indeed that</span>
<span>Everyway blameless, till age did debar him</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>The joys of his might, which hath many oft injured.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXVII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXVII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">geworhte</span>,’ the crux of this passage, B. proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">geþóhte</span>,’ rendering:
<i>I know this people with firm thought every way blameless towards foe and
friends</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXVII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> S. and B. emend so as to negative the verb ‘meet.’ “Why should
Hrothgar weep if he expects to meet Beowulf again?” both these scholars
ask. But the weeping is mentioned before the ‘expectations’: the tears may
have been due to many emotions, especially gratitude, struggling for expression.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXVIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXVIII">XXVIII.</a></h2><h2>THE HOMEWARD JOURNEY.—THE TWO QUEENS. </h2>
<span>Then the band of very valiant retainers</span>
<span>Came to the current; they were clad all in armor,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The coast-guard
again.</span>
<span>In link-woven burnies. The land-warder noticed</span>
<span>The return of the earlmen, as he erstwhile had seen them;</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Nowise with insult he greeted the strangers</span>
<span>From the naze of the cliff, but rode on to meet them;</span>
<span>Said the bright-armored visitors<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXVIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> vesselward traveled</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_65">[65]</span>
<span>Welcome to Weders. The wide-bosomed craft then</span>
<span>Lay on the sand, laden with armor,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>With horses and jewels, the ring-stemmèd sailer:</span>
<span>The mast uptowered o’er the treasure of Hrothgar.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf gives the
guard a handsome
sword.</span>
<span>To the boat-ward a gold-bound brand he presented,</span>
<span>That he was afterwards honored on the ale-bench more highly</span>
<span>As the heirloom’s owner. <sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXVIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>Set he out on his vessel,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>To drive on the deep, Dane-country left he.</span>
<span>Along by the mast then a sea-garment fluttered,</span>
<span>A rope-fastened sail. The sea-boat resounded,</span>
<span>The wind o’er the waters the wave-floater nowise</span>
<span>Kept from its journey; the sea-goer traveled,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>The foamy-necked floated forth o’er the currents,</span>
<span>The well-fashioned vessel o’er the ways of the ocean,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The Geats see
their own land
again.</span>
<span>Till they came within sight of the cliffs of the Geatmen,</span>
<span>The well-known headlands. The wave-goer hastened</span>
<span>Driven by breezes, stood on the shore.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The port-warden is
anxiously looking
for them.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Prompt at the ocean, the port-ward was ready,</span>
<span>Who long in the past outlooked in the distance,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.3" id="XXVIII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>At water’s-edge waiting well-lovèd heroes;</span>
<span>He bound to the bank then the broad-bosomed vessel</span>
<span>Fast in its fetters, lest the force of the waters</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Should be able to injure the ocean-wood winsome.</span>
<span>Bade he up then take the treasure of princes,</span>
<span>Plate-gold and fretwork; not far was it thence</span>
<span>To go off in search of the giver of jewels:</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_66">[66]</span>
<span>Hrethel’s son Higelac at home there remaineth,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.4" id="XXVIII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Himself with his comrades close to the sea-coast.</span>
<span>The building was splendid, the king heroic,</span>
<span>Great in his hall, Hygd very young was,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hygd, the noble
queen of Higelac,
lavish of gifts.</span>
<span>Fine-mooded, clever, though few were the winters</span>
<span>That the daughter of Hæreth had dwelt in the borough;</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>But she nowise was cringing nor niggard of presents,</span>
<span>Of ornaments rare, to the race of the Geatmen.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Offa’s consort,
Thrytho, is contrasted
with Hygd.</span>
<span>Thrytho nursed anger, excellent<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.5" id="XXVIII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> folk-queen,</span>
<span>Hot-burning hatred: no hero whatever</span>
<span>’Mong household companions, her husband excepted</span>
<span class="sidenote">She is a terror to
all save her husband.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Dared to adventure to look at the woman</span>
<span>With eyes in the daytime;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.6" id="XXVIII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup> but he knew that death-chains</span>
<span>Hand-wreathed were wrought him: early thereafter,</span>
<span>When the hand-strife was over, edges were ready,</span>
<span>That fierce-raging sword-point had to force a decision,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Murder-bale show. Such no womanly custom</span>
<span>For a lady to practise, though lovely her person,</span>
<span>That a weaver-of-peace, on pretence of anger</span>
<span>A belovèd liegeman of life should deprive.</span>
<span>Soothly this hindered Heming’s kinsman;</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Other ale-drinking earlmen asserted</span>
<span>That fearful folk-sorrows fewer she wrought them,</span>
<span>Treacherous doings, since first she was given</span>
<span>Adorned with gold to the war-hero youthful,</span>
<span>For her origin honored, when Offa’s great palace</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>O’er the fallow flood by her father’s instructions</span>
<span>She sought on her journey, where she afterwards fully,</span>
<span>Famed for her virtue, her fate on the king’s-seat</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_67">[67]</span>
<span>Enjoyed in her lifetime, love did she hold with</span>
<span>The ruler of heroes, the best, it is told me,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Of all of the earthmen that oceans encompass,</span>
<span>Of earl-kindreds endless; hence Offa was famous</span>
<span>Far and widely, by gifts and by battles,</span>
<span>Spear-valiant hero; the home of his fathers</span>
<span>He governed with wisdom, whence Eomær did issue</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>For help unto heroes, Heming’s kinsman,</span>
<span>Grandson of Garmund, great in encounters.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">scawan</span>’ (1896), ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">scaðan</span>’ has been proposed. Accepting this, we
may render: <i>He said the bright-armored warriors were going to their vessel,
welcome, etc</i>. (Cf. 1804.)
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> R. suggests, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Gewát him on naca</span>,’ and renders: <i>The vessel set out, to
drive on the sea, the Dane-country left</i>. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">On</span>’ bears the alliteration; cf. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on
hafu</span>’ (2524). This has some advantages over the H.-So. reading; viz.
(1) It adds nothing to the text; (2) it makes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">naca</span>’ the subject, and thus
brings the passage into keeping with the context, where the poet has exhausted
his vocabulary in detailing the actions of the vessel.—B.’s emendation
(cf. P. and B. XII. 97) is violent.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> B. translates: <i>Who for a long time, ready at the coast, had looked out into
the distance eagerly for the dear men</i>. This changes the syntax of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">léofra
manna</span>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wunað</span>’ (v. 1924) several eminent critics suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wunade</span>’ (=remained).
This makes the passage much clearer.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> Why should such a woman be described as an ‘excellent’ queen? C.
suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">frécnu</span>’ = dangerous, bold.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">an dæges</span>’ various readings have been offered. If ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">and-éges</span>’ be
accepted, the sentence will read: <i>No hero … dared look upon her, eye to eye</i>.
If ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">án-dæges</span>’ be adopted, translate: <i>Dared look upon her the whole day</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXIX">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXIX">XXIX.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF AND HIGELAC.</h2>
<span>Then the brave one departed, his band along with him,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf and his
party seek Higelac.</span>
<span>Seeking the sea-shore, the sea-marches treading,</span>
<span>The wide-stretching shores. The world-candle glimmered,</span>
<span>The sun from the southward; they proceeded then onward,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Early arriving where they heard that the troop-lord,</span>
<span>Ongentheow’s slayer, excellent, youthful</span>
<span>Folk-prince and warrior was distributing jewels,</span>
<span>Close in his castle. The coming of Beowulf</span>
<span>Was announced in a message quickly to Higelac,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>That the folk-troop’s defender forth to the palace</span>
<span>The linden-companion alive was advancing,</span>
<span>Secure from the combat courtward a-going.</span>
<span>The building was early inward made ready</span>
<span>For the foot-going guests as the good one had ordered.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf sits by his
liegelord.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>He sat by the man then who had lived through the struggle,</span>
<span>Kinsman by kinsman, when the king of the people</span>
<span>Had in lordly language saluted the dear one,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Hygd receives
the heroes.</span>
<span>In words that were formal. The daughter of Hæreth</span>
<span>Coursed through the building, carrying mead-cups:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.1" id="XXIX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_68">[68]</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>She loved the retainers, tendered the beakers</span>
<span>To the high-minded Geatmen. Higelac ’gan then</span>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac is greatly
interested in Beowulf’s
adventures.</span>
<span>Pleasantly plying his companion with questions</span>
<span>In the high-towering palace. A curious interest</span>
<span>Tormented his spirit, what meaning to see in</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The Sea-Geats’ adventures: “Beowulf worthy,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Give an account of
thy adventures,
Beowulf dear.</span>
<span>How throve your journeying, when thou thoughtest suddenly</span>
<span>Far o’er the salt-streams to seek an encounter,</span>
<span>A battle at Heorot? Hast bettered for Hrothgar,</span>
<span>The famous folk-leader, his far-published sorrows</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Any at all? In agony-billows</span>
<span class="sidenote">My suspense has
been great.</span>
<span>I mused upon torture, distrusted the journey</span>
<span>Of the belovèd liegeman; I long time did pray thee</span>
<span>By no means to seek out the murderous spirit,</span>
<span>To suffer the South-Danes themselves to decide on<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.2" id="XXIX.FNREF.2" title="See my note to 1599, supra, and B. in P. and B. XII. 97.">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Grappling with Grendel. To God I am thankful</span>
<span>To be suffered to see thee safe from thy journey.”</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf narrates
his adventures.</span>
<span>Beowulf answered, bairn of old Ecgtheow:</span>
<span>“’Tis hidden by no means, Higelac chieftain,</span>
<span>From many of men, the meeting so famous,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>What mournful moments of me and of Grendel</span>
<span>Were passed in the place where he pressing affliction</span>
<span>On the Victory-Scyldings scathefully brought,</span>
<span>Anguish forever; that all I avengèd,</span>
<span>So that any under heaven of the kinsmen of Grendel</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s kindred
have no cause to
boast.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Needeth not boast of that cry-in-the-morning,</span>
<span>Who longest liveth of the loth-going kindred,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.3" id="XXIX.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>Encompassed by moorland. I came in my journey</span>
<span>To the royal ring-hall, Hrothgar to greet there:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar received
me very cordially.</span>
<span>Soon did the famous scion of Healfdene,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>When he understood fully the spirit that led me,</span>
<span>Assign me a seat with the son of his bosom.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_69">[69]</span>
<span>The troop was in joyance; mead-glee greater</span>
<span>’Neath arch of the ether not ever beheld I</span>
<span class="sidenote">The queen also
showed up no little
honor.</span>
<span>’Mid hall-building holders. The highly-famed queen,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Peace-tie of peoples, oft passed through the building,</span>
<span>Cheered the young troopers; she oft tendered a hero</span>
<span>A beautiful ring-band, ere she went to her sitting.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar’s lovely
daughter.</span>
<span>Oft the daughter of Hrothgar in view of the courtiers</span>
<span>To the earls at the end the ale-vessel carried,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Whom Freaware I heard then hall-sitters title,</span>
<span>When nail-adorned jewels she gave to the heroes:</span>
<span class="sidenote">She is betrothed to
Ingeld, in order to
unite the Danes
and Heathobards.</span>
<span>Gold-bedecked, youthful, to the glad son of Froda</span>
<span>Her faith has been plighted; the friend of the Scyldings,</span>
<span>The guard of the kingdom, hath given his sanction,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.4" id="XXIX.FNREF.4" title="See note to v. 1599 above.">4</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>And counts it a vantage, for a part of the quarrels,</span>
<span>A portion of hatred, to pay with the woman.</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.5" id="XXIX.FNREF.5">5</a></sup>Somewhere not rarely, when the ruler has fallen,</span>
<span>The life-taking lance relaxeth its fury</span>
<span>For a brief breathing-spell, though the bride be charming!</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Meodu-scencum</span>’ (1981) some would render ‘<i>with mead-pourers</i>.’ Translate
then: <i>The daughter of Hæreth went through the building accompanied by
mead-pourers</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> See my note to <a href="#L.XXIV.41">1599</a>, supra, and B. in P. and B. XII. 97.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fenne</span>,’ supplied by Grdtvg., B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fácne</span>’ (cf. Jul. 350).
Accepting this, translate: <i>Who longest lives of the hated race, steeped in
treachery</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.4">[4]</a> See note to <a href="#L.XXIV.41">v. 1599</a> above.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.5">[5]</a> This is perhaps the least understood sentence in the poem, almost every
word being open to dispute. (1) The ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">nó</span>’ of our text is an emendation, and
is rejected by many scholars. (2) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Seldan</span>’ is by some taken as an adv.
(= <i>seldom</i>), and by others as a noun (= <i>page</i>, <i>companion</i>). (3) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Léod-hryre</span>,’
some render ‘<i>fall of the people</i>’; others, ‘<i>fall of the prince</i>.’ (4) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Búgeð</span>,’
most scholars regard as the intrans. verb meaning ‘<i>bend</i>,’ ‘<i>rest</i>’; but one
great scholar has translated it ‘<i>shall kill</i>.’ (5) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Hwær</span>,’ Very recently, has
been attacked, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wære</span>’ being suggested. (6) As a corollary to the above,
the same critic proposes to drop ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oft</span>’ out of the text.—t.B. suggests: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Oft
seldan wære</span> after <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">léodhryre</span>: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">lýtle hwíle bongár búgeð, þéah séo brýd duge</span>
= <i>often has a treaty been (thus) struck, after a prince had fallen: (but only)
a short time is the spear (then) wont to rest, however excellent the bride may be</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXX">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXX">XXX.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF NARRATES HIS ADVENTURES TO HIGELAC.</h2>
<span>“It well may discomfit the prince of the Heathobards</span>
<span>And each of the thanemen of earls that attend him,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_70">[70]</span>
<span>When he goes to the building escorting the woman,</span>
<span>That a noble-born Daneman the knights should be feasting:</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>There gleam on his person the leavings of elders</span>
<span>Hard and ring-bright, Heathobards’ treasure,</span>
<span>While they wielded their arms, till they misled to the battle</span>
<span>Their own dear lives and belovèd companions.</span>
<span>He saith at the banquet who the collar beholdeth,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>An ancient ash-warrior who earlmen’s destruction</span>
<span>Clearly recalleth (cruel his spirit),</span>
<span>Sadly beginneth sounding the youthful</span>
<span>Thane-champion’s spirit through the thoughts of his bosom,</span>
<span>War-grief to waken, and this word-answer speaketh:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Ingeld is stirred up
to break the truce.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>‘Art thou able, my friend, to know when thou seest it</span>
<span>The brand which thy father bare to the conflict</span>
<span>In his latest adventure, ’neath visor of helmet,</span>
<span>The dearly-loved iron, where Danemen did slay him,</span>
<span>And brave-mooded Scyldings, on the fall of the heroes,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>(When vengeance was sleeping) the slaughter-place wielded?</span>
<span>E’en now some man of the murderer’s progeny</span>
<span>Exulting in ornaments enters the building,</span>
<span>Boasts of his blood-shedding, offbeareth the jewel</span>
<span>Which thou shouldst wholly hold in possession!’</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>So he urgeth and mindeth on every occasion</span>
<span>With woe-bringing words, till waxeth the season</span>
<span>When the woman’s thane for the works of his father,</span>
<span>The bill having bitten, blood-gory sleepeth,</span>
<span>Fated to perish; the other one thenceward</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>’Scapeth alive, the land knoweth thoroughly.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXX.FNDEF.1" id="XXX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Then the oaths of the earlmen on each side are broken,</span>
<span>When rancors unresting are raging in Ingeld</span>
<span>And his wife-love waxeth less warm after sorrow.</span>
<span>So the Heathobards’ favor not faithful I reckon,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Their part in the treaty not true to the Danemen,</span>
<span>Their friendship not fast. I further shall tell thee</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_71">[71]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Having made these
preliminary statements,
I will now
tell thee of Grendel,
the monster.</span>
<span>More about Grendel, that thou fully mayst hear,</span>
<span>Ornament-giver, what afterward came from</span>
<span>The hand-rush of heroes. When heaven’s bright jewel</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>O’er earthfields had glided, the stranger came raging,</span>
<span>The horrible night-fiend, us for to visit,</span>
<span>Where wholly unharmed the hall we were guarding.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hondscio fell first</span>
<span>To Hondscio happened a hopeless contention,</span>
<span>Death to the doomed one, dead he fell foremost,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Girded war-champion; to him Grendel became then,</span>
<span>To the vassal distinguished, a tooth-weaponed murderer,</span>
<span>The well-beloved henchman’s body all swallowed.</span>
<span>Not the earlier off empty of hand did</span>
<span>The bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of evils,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Wish to escape from the gold-giver’s palace,</span>
<span>But sturdy of strength he strove to outdo me,</span>
<span>Hand-ready grappled. A glove was suspended</span>
<span>Spacious and wondrous, in art-fetters fastened,</span>
<span>Which was fashioned entirely by touch of the craftman</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>From the dragon’s skin by the devil’s devices:</span>
<span>He down in its depths would do me unsadly</span>
<span>One among many, deed-doer raging,</span>
<span>Though sinless he saw me; not so could it happen</span>
<span>When I in my anger upright did stand.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>’Tis too long to recount how requital I furnished</span>
<span>For every evil to the earlmen’s destroyer;</span>
<span class="sidenote">I reflected honor
upon my people.</span>
<span>’Twas there, my prince, that I proudly distinguished</span>
<span>Thy land with my labors. He left and retreated,</span>
<span>He lived his life a little while longer:</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Yet his right-hand guarded his footstep in Heorot,</span>
<span>And sad-mooded thence to the sea-bottom fell he,</span>
<span>Mournful in mind. For the might-rush of battle</span>
<span class="sidenote">King Hrothgar
lavished gifts upon
me.</span>
<span>The friend of the Scyldings, with gold that was plated,</span>
<span>With ornaments many, much requited me,</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>When daylight had dawned, and down to the banquet</span>
<span>We had sat us together. There was chanting and joyance:</span>
<span>The age-stricken Scylding asked many questions</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_72">[72]</span>
<span>And of old-times related; oft light-ringing harp-strings,</span>
<span>Joy-telling wood, were touched by the brave one;</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>Now he uttered measures, mourning and truthful,</span>
<span>Then the large-hearted land-king a legend of wonder</span>
<span>Truthfully told us. Now troubled with years</span>
<span class="sidenote">The old king is
sad over the loss
of his youthful
vigor.</span>
<span>The age-hoary warrior afterward began to</span>
<span>Mourn for the might that marked him in youth-days;</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>His breast within boiled, when burdened with winters</span>
<span>Much he remembered. From morning till night then</span>
<span>We joyed us therein as etiquette suffered,</span>
<span>Till the second night season came unto earth-folk.</span>
<span>Then early thereafter, the mother of Grendel</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s mother.</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Was ready for vengeance, wretched she journeyed;</span>
<span>Her son had death ravished, the wrath of the Geatmen.</span>
<span>The horrible woman avengèd her offspring,</span>
<span>And with mighty mainstrength murdered a hero.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Æschere falls a
prey to her vengeance.</span>
<span>There the spirit of Æschere, agèd adviser,</span>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<span>Was ready to vanish; nor when morn had lightened</span>
<span>Were they anywise suffered to consume him with fire,</span>
<span>Folk of the Danemen, the death-weakened hero,</span>
<span>Nor the belovèd liegeman to lay on the pyre;</span>
<span class="sidenote">She suffered not
his body to be
burned, but ate it.</span>
<span>She the corpse had offcarried in the clutch of the foeman<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXX.FNDEF.2" id="XXX.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">95</span>
<span>’Neath mountain-brook’s flood. To Hrothgar ’twas saddest</span>
<span>Of pains that ever had preyed on the chieftain;</span>
<span>By the life of thee the land-prince then me<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXX.FNDEF.3" id="XXX.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>Besought very sadly, in sea-currents’ eddies</span>
<span>To display my prowess, to peril my safety,</span>
<span class="linenum">100</span>
<span>Might-deeds accomplish; much did he promise.</span>
<span class="sidenote">I sought the creature
in her den,</span>
<span>I found then the famous flood-current’s cruel,</span>
<span>Horrible depth-warder. A while unto us two</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_73">[73]</span>
<span>Hand was in common; the currents were seething</span>
<span>With gore that was clotted, and Grendel’s fierce mother’s</span>
<span class="sidenote">and hewed her
head off.</span>
<span class="linenum">105</span>
<span>Head I offhacked in the hall at the bottom</span>
<span>With huge-reaching sword-edge, hardly I wrested</span>
<span>My life from her clutches; not doomed was I then,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Jewels were freely
bestowed upon me.</span>
<span>But the warden of earlmen afterward gave me</span>
<span>Jewels in quantity, kinsman of Healfdene.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">lifigende</span>’ (2063), a mere conjecture, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wígende</span>’ has been suggested.
The line would then read: <i>Escapeth by fighting, knows the land thoroughly</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fæðmum</span>,’ Gr.’s conjecture, B. proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">færunga</span>.’ These three
half-verses would then read: <i>She bore off the corpse of her foe suddenly under
the mountain-torrent</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXX.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXX.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The phrase ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þíne lýfe</span>’ (2132) was long rendered ‘<i>with thy (presupposed)
permission</i>.’ The verse would read: <i>The land-prince then sadly besought me,
with thy (presupposed) permission, etc</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXI">XXXI.</a></h2><h2>GIFT-GIVING IS MUTUAL.</h2>
<span>“So the belovèd land-prince lived in decorum;</span>
<span>I had missed no rewards, no meeds of my prowess,</span>
<span>But he gave me jewels, regarding my wishes,</span>
<span>Healfdene his bairn; I’ll bring them to thee, then,</span>
<span class="sidenote">All my gifts I lay
at thy feet.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Atheling of earlmen, offer them gladly.</span>
<span>And still unto thee is all my affection:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXI.FNDEF.1" id="XXXI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>But few of my folk-kin find I surviving</span>
<span>But thee, dear Higelac!” Bade he in then to carry<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXI.FNDEF.2" id="XXXI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>The boar-image, banner, battle-high helmet,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Iron-gray armor, the excellent weapon,</span>
<span class="sidenote">This armor I have
belonged of yore to
Heregar.</span>
<span>In song-measures said: “This suit-for-the-battle</span>
<span>Hrothgar presented me, bade me expressly,</span>
<span>Wise-mooded atheling, thereafter to tell thee<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXI.FNDEF.3" id="XXXI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>The whole of its history, said King Heregar owned it,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Dane-prince for long: yet he wished not to give then</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_74">[74]</span>
<span>The mail to his son, though dearly he loved him,</span>
<span>Hereward the hardy. Hold all in joyance!”</span>
<span>I heard that there followed hard on the jewels</span>
<span>Two braces of stallions of striking resemblance,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Dappled and yellow; he granted him usance</span>
<span>Of horses and treasures. So a kinsman should bear him,</span>
<span>No web of treachery weave for another,</span>
<span>Nor by cunning craftiness cause the destruction</span>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac loves his
nephew Beowulf.</span>
<span>Of trusty companion.  Most precious to Higelac,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The bold one in battle, was the bairn of his sister,</span>
<span>And each unto other mindful of favors.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf gives
Hygd the necklace
that Wealhtheow
had given him.</span>
<span>I am told that to Hygd he proffered the necklace,</span>
<span>Wonder-gem rare that Wealhtheow gave him,</span>
<span>The troop-leader’s daughter, a trio of horses</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Slender and saddle-bright; soon did the jewel</span>
<span>Embellish her bosom, when the beer-feast was over.</span>
<span>So Ecgtheow’s bairn brave did prove him,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is famous.</span>
<span>War-famous man, by deeds that were valiant,</span>
<span>He lived in honor, belovèd companions</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Slew not carousing; his mood was not cruel,</span>
<span>But by hand-strength hugest of heroes then living</span>
<span>The brave one retained the bountiful gift that</span>
<span>The Lord had allowed him. Long was he wretched,</span>
<span>So that sons of the Geatmen accounted him worthless,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>And the lord of the liegemen loth was to do him</span>
<span>Mickle of honor, when mead-cups were passing;</span>
<span>They fully believed him idle and sluggish,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He is requited for
the slights suffered
in earlier days.</span>
<span>An indolent atheling: to the honor-blest man there</span>
<span>Came requital for the cuts he had suffered.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>The folk-troop’s defender bade fetch to the building</span>
<span>The heirloom of Hrethel, embellished with gold,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac overwhelms
the conqueror
with gifts.</span>
<span>So the brave one enjoined it; there was jewel no richer</span>
<span>In the form of a weapon ’mong Geats of that era;</span>
<span>In Beowulf’s keeping he placed it and gave him</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Seven of thousands, manor and lordship.</span>
<span>Common to both was land ’mong the people,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_75">[75]</span>
<span>Estate and inherited rights and possessions,</span>
<span>To the second one specially spacious dominions,</span>
<span>To the one who was better. It afterward happened</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>In days that followed, befell the battle-thanes,</span>
<span class="sidenote">After Heardred’s
death, Beowulf becomes
king.</span>
<span>After Higelac’s death, and when Heardred was murdered</span>
<span>With weapons of warfare ’neath well-covered targets,</span>
<span>When valiant battlemen in victor-band sought him,</span>
<span>War-Scylfing heroes harassed the nephew</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Of Hereric in battle. To Beowulf’s keeping</span>
<span>Turned there in time extensive dominions:</span>
<span class="sidenote">He rules the Geats
fifty years.</span>
<span>He fittingly ruled them a fifty of winters</span>
<span>(He a man-ruler wise was, manor-ward old) till</span>
<span>A certain one ’gan, on gloom-darkening nights, a</span>
<span class="sidenote">The fire-drake.</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Dragon, to govern, who guarded a treasure,</span>
<span>A high-rising stone-cliff, on heath that was grayish:</span>
<span>A path ’neath it lay, unknown unto mortals.</span>
<span>Some one of earthmen entered the mountain,</span>
<span>The heathenish hoard laid hold of with ardor;</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> This verse B. renders, ‘<i>Now serve I again thee alone as my gracious king</i>.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eafor</span>’ (2153), Kl. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ealdor</span>.’ Translate then: <i>Bade the
prince then to bear in the banner, battle-high helmet, etc</i>. On the other hand,
W. takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eaforhéafodsegn</span>’ as a compound, meaning ‘helmet’: <i>He bade them
bear in the helmet, battle-high helm, gray armor, etc</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The H.-So. rendering (<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ærest</span> = <i>history, origin</i>; ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eft</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">est</span>’), though
liable to objection, is perhaps the best offered. ‘That I should very early tell
thee of his favor, kindness’ sounds well; but ‘his’ is badly placed to limit
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ést</span>.’—Perhaps, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eft</span>’ with verbs of saying may have the force of Lat. prefix
‘<span class="la" lang="la" xml:lang="la">re</span>,’ and the H.-So. reading mean, ‘that I should its origin rehearse to thee.’
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXII">XXXII.</a></h2><h2>THE HOARD AND THE DRAGON.</h2>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>He sought of himself who sorely did harm him,</span>
<span>But, for need very pressing, the servant of one of</span>
<span>The sons of the heroes hate-blows evaded,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Seeking for shelter and the sin-driven warrior</span>
<span>Took refuge within there. He early looked in it,</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_76">[76]</span>
<span>*    *    *    *    *  when the onset surprised him,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hoard.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>He a gem-vessel saw there: many of suchlike</span>
<span>Ancient ornaments in the earth-cave were lying,</span>
<span>As in days of yore some one of men of</span>
<span>Illustrious lineage, as a legacy monstrous,</span>
<span>There had secreted them, careful and thoughtful,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Dear-valued jewels. Death had offsnatched them,</span>
<span>In the days of the past, and the one man moreover</span>
<span>Of the flower of the folk who fared there the longest,</span>
<span>Was fain to defer it, friend-mourning warder,</span>
<span>A little longer to be left in enjoyment</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Of long-lasting treasure.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> A barrow all-ready</span>
<span>Stood on the plain the stream-currents nigh to,</span>
<span>New by the ness-edge, unnethe of approaching:</span>
<span>The keeper of rings carried within a</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>Ponderous deal of the treasure of nobles,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Of gold that was beaten, briefly he spake then:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.3" id="XXXII.FNREF.3" title="Some read ‘fec-word’ (2247), and render: Banning words uttered.">3</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">The ring-giver bewails
the loss of
retainers.</span>
<span>“Hold thou, O Earth, now heroes no more may,</span>
<span>The earnings of earlmen. Lo! erst in thy bosom</span>
<span>Worthy men won them; war-death hath ravished,</span>
<span>Perilous life-bale, all my warriors,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Liegemen belovèd, who this life have forsaken,</span>
<span>Who hall-pleasures saw. No sword-bearer have I,</span>
<span>And no one to burnish the gold-plated vessel,</span>
<span>The high-valued beaker: my heroes are vanished.</span>
<span>The hardy helmet behung with gilding</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Shall be reaved of its riches: the ring-cleansers slumber</span>
<span>Who were charged to have ready visors-for-battle,</span>
<span>And the burnie that bided in battle-encounter</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_77">[77]</span>
<span>O’er breaking of war-shields the bite of the edges</span>
<span>Moulds with the hero. The ring-twisted armor,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Its lord being lifeless, no longer may journey</span>
<span>Hanging by heroes; harp-joy is vanished,</span>
<span>The rapture of glee-wood, no excellent falcon</span>
<span>Swoops through the building, no swift-footed charger</span>
<span>Grindeth the gravel. A grievous destruction</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>No few of the world-folk widely hath scattered!”</span>
<span>So, woful of spirit one after all</span>
<span>Lamented mournfully, moaning in sadness</span>
<span>By day and by night, till death with its billows</span>
<span class="sidenote">The fire-dragon</span>
<span>Dashed on his spirit. Then the ancient dusk-scather</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Found the great treasure standing all open,</span>
<span>He who flaming and fiery flies to the barrows,</span>
<span>Naked war-dragon, nightly escapeth</span>
<span>Encompassed with fire; men under heaven</span>
<span>Widely beheld him. ’Tis said that he looks for<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.4" id="XXXII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>The hoard in the earth, where old he is guarding</span>
<span>The heathenish treasure; he’ll be nowise the better.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon meets
his match.</span>
<span>So three-hundred winters the waster of peoples</span>
<span>Held upon earth that excellent hoard-hall,</span>
<span>Till the forementioned earlman angered him bitterly:</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>The beat-plated beaker he bare to his chieftain</span>
<span>And fullest remission for all his remissness</span>
<span>Begged of his liegelord. Then the hoard<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.5" id="XXXII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> was discovered,</span>
<span>The treasure was taken, his petition was granted</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hero plunders
the dragon’s den</span>
<span>The lorn-mooded liegeman. His lord regarded</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>The old-work of earth-folk—’twas the earliest occasion.</span>
<span>When the dragon awoke, the strife was renewed there;</span>
<span>He snuffed ’long the stone then, stout-hearted found he</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_78">[78]</span>
<span>The footprint of foeman; too far had he gone</span>
<span>With cunning craftiness close to the head of</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>The fire-spewing dragon. So undoomed he may ’scape from</span>
<span>Anguish and exile with ease who possesseth</span>
<span>The favor of Heaven. The hoard-warden eagerly</span>
<span>Searched o’er the ground then, would meet with the person</span>
<span>That caused him sorrow while in slumber reclining:</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>Gleaming and wild he oft went round the cavern,</span>
<span>All of it outward; not any of earthmen</span>
<span>Was seen in that desert.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.6" id="XXXII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup> Yet he joyed in the battle,</span>
<span>Rejoiced in the conflict: oft he turned to the barrow,</span>
<span>Sought for the gem-cup;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.7" id="XXXII.FNREF.7">7</a></sup> this he soon perceived then</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon perceives
that some
one has disturbed
his treasure.</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>That some man or other had discovered the gold,</span>
<span>The famous folk-treasure. Not fain did the hoard-ward</span>
<span>Wait until evening; then the ward of the barrow</span>
<span>Was angry in spirit, the loathèd one wished to</span>
<span>Pay for the dear-valued drink-cup with fire.</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Then the day was done as the dragon would have it,</span>
<span>He no longer would wait on the wall, but departed</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon is infuriated.</span>
<span>Fire-impelled, flaming. Fearful the start was</span>
<span>To earls in the land, as it early thereafter</span>
<span>To their giver-of-gold was grievously ended.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">long-gestréona</span>,’ B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láengestréona</span>,’ and renders, <i>Of fleeting
treasures</i>. S. accepts H.’s ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">long-gestréona</span>,<span class="add" title="Added">’</span> but renders, <i>The treasure long
in accumulating</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hard-fyrdne</span>’ (2246), B. first suggested ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hard-fyndne</span>,’ rendering:
<i>A heap of treasures … so great that its equal would be hard to find</i>. The same
scholar suggests later ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord-wynne dæl</span>’ = <i>A deal of treasure-joy</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Some read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fec-word</span>’ (2247), and render: <i>Banning words uttered</i><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> An earlier reading of H.’s gave the following meaning to this passage:
<i>He is said to inhabit a mound under the earth, where he, etc.</i> The translation
in the text is more authentic.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> The repetition of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord</span>’ in this passage has led some scholars to suggest
new readings to avoid the second ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord</span>.’ This, however, is not under the
main stress, and, it seems to me, might easily be accepted.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> The reading of H.-So. is well defended in the notes to that volume. B.
emends and renders: <i>Nor was there any man in that desert who rejoiced in
conflict, in battle-work.</i> That is, the hoard-ward could not find any one who
had disturbed his slumbers, for no warrior was there, t.B.’s emendation
would give substantially the same translation.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.7">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.7">[7]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sinc-fæt</span>’ (2301): this word both here and in v. 2232, t.B. renders
‘treasure.’
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXIII">XXXIII.</a></h2><h2>BRAVE THOUGH AGED.—REMINISCENCES.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon spits
fire.</span>
<span>The stranger began then to vomit forth fire,</span>
<span>To burn the great manor; the blaze then glimmered</span>
<span>For anguish to earlmen, not anything living</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_79">[79]</span>
<span>Was the hateful air-goer willing to leave there.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>The war of the worm widely was noticed,</span>
<span>The feud of the foeman afar and anear,</span>
<span>How the enemy injured the earls of the Geatmen,</span>
<span>Harried with hatred: back he hied to the treasure,</span>
<span>To the well-hidden cavern ere the coming of daylight.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>He had circled with fire the folk of those regions,</span>
<span>With brand and burning; in the barrow he trusted,</span>
<span>In the wall and his war-might: the weening deceived him.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf hears of
the havoc wrought
by the dragon.</span>
<span>Then straight was the horror to Beowulf published,</span>
<span>Early forsooth, that his own native homestead,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>The best of buildings, was burning and melting,</span>
<span>Gift-seat of Geatmen. ’Twas a grief to the spirit</span>
<span>Of the good-mooded hero, the greatest of sorrows:</span>
<span class="sidenote">He fears that
Heaven is punishing
him for some
crime.</span>
<span>The wise one weened then that wielding his kingdom</span>
<span>’Gainst the ancient commandments, he had bitterly angered</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>The Lord everlasting: with lorn meditations</span>
<span>His bosom welled inward, as was nowise his custom.</span>
<span>The fire-spewing dragon fully had wasted</span>
<span>The fastness of warriors, the water-land outward,</span>
<span>The manor with fire. The folk-ruling hero,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Prince of the Weders, was planning to wreak him.</span>
<span>The warmen’s defender bade them to make him,</span>
<span>Earlmen’s atheling, an excellent war-shield</span>
<span class="sidenote">He orders an iron
shield to be made
from him, wood is
useless.</span>
<span>Wholly of iron: fully he knew then</span>
<span>That wood from the forest was helpless to aid him,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Shield against fire. The long-worthy ruler</span>
<span>Must live the last of his limited earth-days,</span>
<span>Of life in the world and the worm along with him,</span>
<span>Though he long had been holding hoard-wealth in plenty.</span>
<span class="sidenote">He determines to
fight alone.</span>
<span>Then the ring-prince disdained to seek with a war-band,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>With army extensive, the air-going ranger;</span>
<span>He felt no fear of the foeman’s assaults and</span>
<span>He counted for little the might of the dragon,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_80">[80]</span>
<span>His power and prowess: for previously dared he</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s early
triumphs referred
to</span>
<span>A heap of hostility, hazarded dangers,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>War-thane, when Hrothgar’s palace he cleansèd,</span>
<span>Conquering combatant, clutched in the battle</span>
<span>The kinsmen of Grendel, of kindred detested.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac’s death
recalled.</span>
<span>’Twas of hand-fights not least where Higelac was slaughtered,</span>
<span>When the king of the Geatmen with clashings of battle,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Friend-lord of folks in Frisian dominions,</span>
<span>Offspring of Hrethrel perished through sword-drink,</span>
<span>With battle-swords beaten; thence Beowulf came then</span>
<span>On self-help relying, swam through the waters;</span>
<span>He bare on his arm, lone-going, thirty</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Outfits of armor, when the ocean he mounted.</span>
<span>The Hetwars by no means had need to be boastful</span>
<span>Of their fighting afoot, who forward to meet him</span>
<span>Carried their war-shields: not many returned from</span>
<span>The brave-mooded battle-knight back to their homesteads.</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Ecgtheow’s bairn o’er the bight-courses swam then,</span>
<span>Lone-goer lorn to his land-folk returning,</span>
<span>Where Hygd to him tendered treasure and kingdom,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Heardred’s lack of
capacity to rule.</span>
<span>Rings and dominion: her son she not trusted,</span>
<span>To be able to keep the kingdom devised him</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>’Gainst alien races, on the death of King Higelac.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s tact and
delicacy recalled.</span>
<span>Yet the sad ones succeeded not in persuading the atheling</span>
<span>In any way ever, to act as a suzerain</span>
<span>To Heardred, or promise to govern the kingdom;</span>
<span>Yet with friendly counsel in the folk he sustained him,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Gracious, with honor, till he grew to be older,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Reference is here
made to a visit
which Beowulf receives
from Eanmund
and Eadgils,
why they come is
not known.</span>
<span>Wielded the Weders. Wide-fleeing outlaws,</span>
<span>Ohthere’s sons, sought him o’er the waters:</span>
<span>They had stirred a revolt ’gainst the helm of the Scylfings,</span>
<span>The best of the sea-kings, who in Swedish dominions</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>Distributed treasure, distinguished folk-leader.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_81">[81]</span>
<span>’Twas the end of his earth-days; injury fatal<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIII.FNDEF.3" id="XXXIII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>By swing of the sword he received as a greeting,</span>
<span>Offspring of Higelac; Ongentheow’s bairn</span>
<span>Later departed to visit his homestead,</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>When Heardred was dead; let Beowulf rule them,</span>
<span>Govern the Geatmen: good was that folk-king.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Hám</span>’ (2326), the suggestion of B. is accepted by t.B. and other
scholars.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láðan cynnes</span>’ (2355), t.B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láðan cynne</span>,’ apposition to
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">mægum</span>.’ From syntactical and other considerations, this is a most excellent
emendation.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXIII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Gr. read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on feorme</span>’ (2386), rendering: <i>He there at the banquet a fatal
wound received by blows of the sword.</i>
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXIV">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXIV">XXXIV.</a></h2><h2>BEOWULF SEEKS THE DRAGON.—BEOWULF’S REMINISCENCES.</h2>
<span>He planned requital for the folk-leader’s ruin</span>
<span>In days thereafter, to Eadgils the wretched</span>
<span>Becoming an enemy. Ohthere’s son then</span>
<span>Went with a war-troop o’er the wide-stretching currents</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>With warriors and weapons: with woe-journeys cold he</span>
<span>After avenged him, the king’s life he took.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf has been
preserved through
many perils.</span>
<span>So he came off uninjured from all of his battles,</span>
<span>Perilous fights, offspring of Ecgtheow,</span>
<span>From his deeds of daring, till that day most momentous</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>When he fate-driven fared to fight with the dragon.</span>
<span class="sidenote">With eleven comrades,
he seeks the
dragon.</span>
<span>With eleven companions the prince of the Geatmen</span>
<span>Went lowering with fury to look at the fire-drake:</span>
<span>Inquiring he’d found how the feud had arisen,</span>
<span>Hate to his heroes; the highly-famed gem-vessel</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Was brought to his keeping through the hand of th’ informer.</span>
<span class="sidenote">A guide leads the
way, but</span>
<span>That in the throng was thirteenth of heroes,</span>
<span>That caused the beginning of conflict so bitter,</span>
<span>Captive and wretched, must sad-mooded thenceward</span>
<span class="sidenote">very reluctantly.</span>
<span>Point out the place: he passed then unwillingly</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>To the spot where he knew of the notable cavern,</span>
<span>The cave under earth, not far from the ocean,</span>
<span>The anger of eddies, which inward was full of</span>
<span>Jewels and wires: a warden uncanny,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_82">[82]</span>
<span>Warrior weaponed, wardered the treasure,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Old under earth; no easy possession</span>
<span>For any of earth-folk access to get to.</span>
<span>Then the battle-brave atheling sat on the naze-edge,</span>
<span>While the gold-friend of Geatmen gracious saluted</span>
<span>His fireside-companions: woe was his spirit,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Death-boding, wav’ring; Weird very near him,</span>
<span>Who must seize the old hero, his soul-treasure look for,</span>
<span>Dragging aloof his life from his body:</span>
<span>Not flesh-hidden long was the folk-leader’s spirit.</span>
<span>Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s son:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s retrospect.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>“I survived in my youth-days many a conflict,</span>
<span>Hours of onset: that all I remember.</span>
<span>I was seven-winters old when the jewel-prince took me,</span>
<span>High-lord of heroes, at the hands of my father,</span>
<span>Hrethel the hero-king had me in keeping,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrethel took me
when I was seven.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Gave me treasure and feasting, our kinship remembered;</span>
<span>Not ever was I <i>any</i> less dear to him</span>
<span class="sidenote">He treated me as
a son.</span>
<span>Knight in the boroughs, than the bairns of his household,</span>
<span>Herebald and Hæthcyn and Higelac mine.</span>
<span>To the eldest unjustly by acts of a kinsman</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Was murder-bed strewn, since him Hæthcyn from horn-bow</span>
<span class="sidenote">One of the brothers
accidentally kills
another.</span>
<span>His sheltering chieftain shot with an arrow,</span>
<span>Erred in his aim and injured his kinsman,</span>
<span>One brother the other, with blood-sprinkled spear:</span>
<span class="sidenote">No fee could compound
for such a
calamity.</span>
<span>’Twas a feeless fight, finished in malice,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Sad to his spirit; the folk-prince however</span>
<span>Had to part from existence with vengeance untaken.</span>
<span class="sidenote">[A parallel case
is supposed.]</span>
<span>So to hoar-headed hero ’tis heavily crushing<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIV.FNDEF.1" id="XXXIV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_83">[83]</span>
<span>To live to see his son as he rideth</span>
<span>Young on the gallows: then measures he chanteth,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>A song of sorrow, when his son is hanging</span>
<span>For the raven’s delight, and aged and hoary</span>
<span>He is unable to offer any assistance.</span>
<span>Every morning his offspring’s departure</span>
<span>Is constant recalled: he cares not to wait for</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>The birth of an heir in his borough-enclosures,</span>
<span>Since that one through death-pain the deeds hath experienced.</span>
<span>He heart-grieved beholds in the house of his son the</span>
<span>Wine-building wasted, the wind-lodging places</span>
<span>Reaved of their roaring; the riders are sleeping,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>The knights in the grave; there’s no sound of the harp-wood,</span>
<span>Joy in the yards, as of yore were familiar.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXIV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Gomelum ceorle</span>’ (2445).—H. takes these words as referring to Hrethel;
but the translator here departs from his editor by understanding the poet to
refer to a hypothetical old man, introduced as an illustration of a father’s
sorrow.

<p>
Hrethrel had certainly never seen a son of his ride on the gallows to feed
the crows.
</p>
<p>
The passage beginning ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swá bið géomorlic</span>’ seems to be an effort to reach
a full simile, ‘as … so.’ ‘As it is mournful for an old man, etc. … so the
defence of the Weders (2463) bore heart-sorrow, etc.’ The verses 2451 to
2463½ would be parenthetical, the poet’s feelings being so strong as to interrupt
the simile. The punctuation of the fourth edition would be better—a
comma after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">galgan</span>’ (2447). The translation may be indicated as follows:
<i>(Just) as it is sad for an old man to see his son ride young on the gallows when
he himself is uttering mournful measures, a sorrowful song, while his son hangs
for a comfort to the raven, and he, old and infirm, cannot render him any
kelp—(he is constantly reminded, etc., 2451-2463)—so the defence of the
Weders, etc.</i>
</p>
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXV">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXV">XXXV.</a></h2><h2>REMINISCENCES (<i>continued</i>).—BEOWULF’S LAST BATTLE.</h2>
<span>“He seeks then his chamber, singeth a woe-song</span>
<span>One for the other; all too extensive</span>
<span>Seemed homesteads and plains. So the helm of the Weders</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrethel grieves
for Herebald.</span>
<span>Mindful of Herebald heart-sorrow carried,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Stirred with emotion, nowise was able</span>
<span>To wreak his ruin on the ruthless destroyer:</span>
<span>He was unable to follow the warrior with hatred,</span>
<span>With deeds that were direful, though dear he not held him.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_84">[84]</span>
<span>Then pressed by the pang this pain occasioned him,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>He gave up glee, God-light elected;</span>
<span>He left to his sons, as the man that is rich does,</span>
<span>His land and fortress, when from life he departed.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Strife between
Swedes and Geats.</span>
<span>Then was crime and hostility ’twixt Swedes and Geatmen,</span>
<span>O’er wide-stretching water warring was mutual,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Burdensome hatred, when Hrethel had perished,</span>
<span>And Ongentheow’s offspring were active and valiant,</span>
<span>Wished not to hold to peace oversea, but</span>
<span>Round Hreosna-beorh often accomplished</span>
<span>Cruelest massacre. This my kinsman avengèd,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>The feud and fury, as ’tis found on inquiry,</span>
<span>Though one of them paid it with forfeit of life-joys,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hæthcyn’s fall at
Ravenswood.</span>
<span>With price that was hard: the struggle became then</span>
<span>Fatal to Hæthcyn, lord of the Geatmen.</span>
<span>Then I heard that at morning one brother the other</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>With edges of irons egged on to murder,</span>
<span>Where Ongentheow maketh onset on Eofor:</span>
<span>The helmet crashed, the hoary-haired Scylfing</span>
<span>Sword-smitten fell, his hand then remembered</span>
<span>Feud-hate sufficient, refused not the death-blow.</span>
<span class="sidenote">I requited him for
the jewels he gave
me.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>The gems that he gave me, with jewel-bright sword I</span>
<span>’Quited in contest, as occasion was offered:</span>
<span>Land he allowed me, life-joy at homestead,</span>
<span>Manor to live on. Little he needed</span>
<span>From Gepids or Danes or in Sweden to look for</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Trooper less true, with treasure to buy him;</span>
<span>’Mong foot-soldiers ever in front I would hie me,</span>
<span>Alone in the vanguard, and evermore gladly</span>
<span>Warfare shall wage, while this weapon endureth</span>
<span>That late and early often did serve me</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf refers to
his having slain
Dæghrefn.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>When I proved before heroes the slayer of Dæghrefn,</span>
<span>Knight of the Hugmen: he by no means was suffered</span>
<span>To the king of the Frisians to carry the jewels,</span>
<span>The breast-decoration; but the banner-possessor</span>
<span>Bowed in the battle, brave-mooded atheling.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_85">[85]</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>No weapon was slayer, but war-grapple broke then</span>
<span>The surge of his spirit, his body destroying.</span>
<span>Now shall weapon’s edge make war for the treasure,</span>
<span>And hand and firm-sword.” Beowulf spake then,</span>
<span>Boast-words uttered—the latest occasion:</span>
<span class="sidenote">He boasts of his
youthful prowess,
and declares himself
still fearless.</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>“I braved in my youth-days battles unnumbered;</span>
<span>Still am I willing the struggle to look for,</span>
<span>Fame-deeds perform, folk-warden prudent,</span>
<span>If the hateful despoiler forth from his cavern</span>
<span>Seeketh me out!” Each of the heroes,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Helm-bearers sturdy, he thereupon greeted</span>
<span class="sidenote">His last salutations.</span>
<span>Belovèd co-liegemen—his last salutation:</span>
<span>“No brand would I bear, no blade for the dragon,</span>
<span>Wist I a way my word-boast to ’complish<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXV.FNDEF.1" id="XXXV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Else with the monster, as with Grendel I did it;</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>But fire in the battle hot I expect there,</span>
<span>Furious flame-burning: so I fixed on my body</span>
<span>Target and war-mail. The ward of the barrow<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXV.FNDEF.2" id="XXXV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>I’ll not flee from a foot-length, the foeman uncanny.</span>
<span>At the wall ’twill befall us as Fate decreeth,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Let Fate decide
between us.</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Each one’s Creator. I am eager in spirit,</span>
<span>With the wingèd war-hero to away with all boasting.</span>
<span>Bide on the barrow with burnies protected,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wait ye here till
the battle is over.</span>
<span>Earls in armor, which of <i>us</i> two may better</span>
<span>Bear his disaster, when the battle is over.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>’Tis no matter of yours, and man cannot do it,</span>
<span>But me and me only, to measure his strength with</span>
<span>The monster of malice, might-deeds to ’complish.</span>
<span>I with prowess shall gain the gold, or the battle,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_86">[86]</span>
<span>Direful death-woe will drag off your ruler!”</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>The mighty champion rose by his shield then,</span>
<span>Brave under helmet, in battle-mail went he</span>
<span>’Neath steep-rising stone-cliffs, the strength he relied on</span>
<span>Of one man alone: no work for a coward.</span>
<span>Then he saw by the wall who a great many battles</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Had lived through, most worthy, when foot-troops collided,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The place of strife
is described.</span>
<span>Stone-arches standing, stout-hearted champion,</span>
<span>Saw a brook from the barrow bubbling out thenceward:</span>
<span>The flood of the fountain was fuming with war-flame:</span>
<span>Not nigh to the hoard, for season the briefest</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Could he brave, without burning, the abyss that was yawning,</span>
<span>The drake was so fiery. The prince of the Weders</span>
<span>Caused then that words came from his bosom,</span>
<span>So fierce was his fury; the firm-hearted shouted:</span>
<span>His battle-clear voice came in resounding</span>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<span>’Neath the gray-colored stone. Stirred was his hatred,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf calls out
under the stone
arches.</span>
<span>The hoard-ward distinguished the speech of a man;</span>
<span>Time was no longer to look out for friendship.</span>
<span>The breath of the monster issued forth first,</span>
<span>Vapory war-sweat, out of the stone-cave:</span>
<span class="sidenote">The terrible encounter.</span>
<span class="linenum">95</span>
<span>The earth re-echoed. The earl ’neath the barrow</span>
<span>Lifted his shield, lord of the Geatmen,</span>
<span>Tow’rd the terrible stranger: the ring-twisted creature’s</span>
<span>Heart was then ready to seek for a struggle.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf brandishes
his sword,</span>
<span>The excellent battle-king first brandished his weapon,</span>
<span class="linenum">100</span>
<span>The ancient heirloom, of edges unblunted,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXV.FNDEF.3" id="XXXV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>To the death-planners twain was terror from other.</span>
<span class="sidenote">and stands against
his shield.</span>
<span>The lord of the troopers intrepidly stood then</span>
<span>’Gainst his high-rising shield, when the dragon coiled him</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon coils
himself.</span>
<span>Quickly together: in corslet he bided.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_87">[87]</span>
<span class="linenum">105</span>
<span>He went then in blazes, bended and striding,</span>
<span>Hasting him forward. His life and body</span>
<span>The targe well protected, for time-period shorter</span>
<span>Than wish demanded for the well-renowned leader,</span>
<span>Where he then for the first day was forced to be victor,</span>
<span class="linenum">110</span>
<span>Famous in battle, as Fate had not willed it.</span>
<span>The lord of the Geatmen uplifted his hand then,</span>
<span>Smiting the fire-drake with sword that was precious,</span>
<span>That bright on the bone the blade-edge did weaken,</span>
<span>Bit more feebly than his folk-leader needed,</span>
<span class="linenum">115</span>
<span>Burdened with bale-griefs. Then the barrow-protector,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon rages</span>
<span>When the sword-blow had fallen, was fierce in his spirit,</span>
<span>Flinging his fires, flamings of battle</span>
<span>Gleamed then afar: the gold-friend of Weders</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s sword
fails him.</span>
<span>Boasted no conquests, his battle-sword failed him</span>
<span class="linenum">120</span>
<span>Naked in conflict, as by no means it ought to,</span>
<span>Long-trusty weapon. ’Twas no slight undertaking</span>
<span>That Ecgtheow’s famous offspring would leave</span>
<span>The drake-cavern’s bottom; he must live in some region</span>
<span>Other than this, by the will of the dragon,</span>
<span class="linenum">125</span>
<span>As each one of earthmen existence must forfeit.</span>
<span>’Twas early thereafter the excellent warriors</span>
<span class="sidenote">The combat is
renewed.</span>
<span>Met with each other. Anew and afresh</span>
<span>The hoard-ward took heart (gasps heaved then his bosom):</span>
<span class="sidenote">The great hero is
reduced to extremities.</span>
<span>Sorrow he suffered encircled with fire</span>
<span class="linenum">130</span>
<span>Who the people erst governed. His companions by no means</span>
<span>Were banded about him, bairns of the princes,</span>
<span class="sidenote">His comrades flee!</span>
<span>With valorous spirit, but they sped to the forest,</span>
<span>Seeking for safety. The soul-deeps of one were</span>
<span class="sidenote">Blood is thicker
than water.</span>
<span>Ruffled by care: kin-love can never</span>
<span class="linenum">135</span>
<span>Aught in him waver who well doth consider.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_88">[88]</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The clause 2520(2)-2522(1), rendered by ‘Wist I … monster,’ Gr.,
followed by S., translates substantially as follows: <i>If I knew how else I might
combat the boastful defiance of the monster</i>.—The translation turns upon
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wiðgrípan</span>,’ a word not understood.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> B. emends and translates: <i>I will not flee the space of a foot from the guard
of the barrow, but there shall be to us a fight at the wall, as fate decrees, each
one’s Creator.</i>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The translation of this passage is based on ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unsláw</span>’ (2565), accepted by
H.-So., in lieu of the long-standing ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ungléaw</span>.’ The former is taken as an
adj. limiting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sweord</span>’; the latter as an adj. c. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúð-cyning</span>’: <i>The good war-king,
rash with edges, brandished his sword, his old relic.</i> The latter gives a
more rhetorical Anglo-Saxon (poetical) sentence.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXVI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXVI">XXXVI.</a></h2><h2>WIGLAF THE TRUSTY.—BEOWULF IS DESERTED BY FRIENDS
AND BY SWORD.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf remains
true—the ideal
Teutonic liegeman.</span>
<span>The son of Weohstan was Wiglaf entitled,</span>
<span>Shield-warrior precious, prince of the Scylfings,</span>
<span>Ælfhere’s kinsman: he saw his dear liegelord</span>
<span>Enduring the heat ’neath helmet and visor.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Then he minded the holding that erst he had given him,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf recalls
Beowulf’s generosity.</span>
<span>The Wægmunding warriors’ wealth-blessèd homestead,</span>
<span>Each of the folk-rights his father had wielded;</span>
<span>He was hot for the battle, his hand seized the target,</span>
<span>The yellow-bark shield, he unsheathed his old weapon,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Which was known among earthmen as the relic of Eanmund,</span>
<span>Ohthere’s offspring, whom, exiled and friendless,</span>
<span>Weohstan did slay with sword-edge in battle,</span>
<span>And carried his kinsman the clear-shining helmet,</span>
<span>The ring-made burnie, the old giant-weapon</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>That Onela gave him, his boon-fellow’s armor,</span>
<span>Ready war-trappings: he the feud did not mention,</span>
<span>Though he’d fatally smitten the son of his brother.</span>
<span>Many a half-year held he the treasures,</span>
<span>The bill and the burnie, till his bairn became able,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Like his father before him, fame-deeds to ’complish;</span>
<span>Then he gave him ’mong Geatmen a goodly array of</span>
<span>Weeds for his warfare; he went from life then</span>
<span>Old on his journey. ’Twas the earliest time then</span>
<span class="sidenote">This is Wiglaf’s
first battle as liegeman
of Beowulf.</span>
<span>That the youthful champion might charge in the battle</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Aiding his liegelord; his spirit was dauntless.</span>
<span>Nor did kinsman’s bequest quail at the battle:</span>
<span>This the dragon discovered on their coming together.</span>
<span>Wiglaf uttered many a right-saying,</span>
<span>Said to his fellows, sad was his spirit:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf appeals to
the pride of the
cowards.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>“I remember the time when, tasting the mead-cup,</span>
<span>We promised in the hall the lord of us all</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_89">[89]</span>
<span>Who gave us these ring-treasures, that this battle-equipment,</span>
<span>Swords and helmets, we’d certainly quite him,</span>
<span>Should need of such aid ever befall him:</span>
<span class="sidenote">How we have forfeited
our liegelord’s confidence!</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>In the war-band he chose us for this journey spontaneously,</span>
<span>Stirred us to glory and gave me these jewels,</span>
<span>Since he held and esteemed us trust-worthy spearmen,</span>
<span>Hardy helm-bearers, though this hero-achievement</span>
<span>Our lord intended alone to accomplish,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Ward of his people, for most of achievements,</span>
<span>Doings audacious, he did among earth-folk.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Our lord is in sore
need of us.</span>
<span>The day is now come when the ruler of earthmen</span>
<span>Needeth the vigor of valiant heroes:</span>
<span>Let us wend us towards him, the war-prince to succor,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>While the heat yet rageth, horrible fire-fight.</span>
<span class="sidenote">I would rather die
than go home with
out my suzerain.</span>
<span>God wot in me, ’tis mickle the liefer</span>
<span>The blaze should embrace my body and eat it</span>
<span>With my treasure-bestower. Meseemeth not proper</span>
<span>To bear our battle-shields back to our country,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>’Less first we are able to fell and destroy the</span>
<span>Long-hating foeman, to defend the life of</span>
<span class="sidenote">Surely he does
not deserve to die
alone.</span>
<span>The prince of the Weders. Well do I know ’tisn’t</span>
<span>Earned by his exploits, he only of Geatmen</span>
<span>Sorrow should suffer, sink in the battle:</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Brand and helmet to us both shall be common,</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVI.FNDEF.1" id="XXXVI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup>Shield-cover, burnie.” Through the bale-smoke he stalked then,</span>
<span>Went under helmet to the help of his chieftain,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf reminds
Beowulf of his
youthful boasts.</span>
<span>Briefly discoursing: “Beowulf dear,</span>
<span>Perform thou all fully, as thou formerly saidst,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>In thy youthful years, that while yet thou livedst</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_90">[90]</span>
<span>Thou wouldst let thine honor not ever be lessened.</span>
<span>Thy life thou shalt save, mighty in actions,</span>
<span>Atheling undaunted, with all of thy vigor;</span>
<span class="sidenote">The monster advances
on them.</span>
<span>I’ll give thee assistance.” The dragon came raging,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Wild-mooded stranger, when these words had been uttered</span>
<span>(’Twas the second occasion), seeking his enemies,</span>
<span>Men that were hated, with hot-gleaming fire-waves;</span>
<span>With blaze-billows burned the board to its edges:</span>
<span>The fight-armor failed then to furnish assistance</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>To the youthful spear-hero: but the young-agèd stripling</span>
<span>Quickly advanced ’neath his kinsman’s war-target,</span>
<span>Since his own had been ground in the grip of the fire.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf strikes at
the dragon.</span>
<span>Then the warrior-king was careful of glory,</span>
<span>He soundly smote with sword-for-the-battle,</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>That it stood in the head by hatred <span class="corr" title="original: ydriven">driven</span>;</span>
<span>Nægling was shivered, the old and iron-made</span>
<span class="sidenote">His sword fails
him.</span>
<span>Brand of Beowulf in battle deceived him.</span>
<span>’Twas denied him that edges of irons were able</span>
<span>To help in the battle; the hand was too mighty</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVI.FNDEF.2" id="XXXVI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>Which every weapon, as I heard on inquiry,</span>
<span>Outstruck in its stroke, when to struggle he carried</span>
<span>The wonderful war-sword: it waxed him no better.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon advances
on Beowulf
again.</span>
<span>Then the people-despoiler—third of his onsets—</span>
<span>Fierce-raging fire-drake, of feud-hate was mindful,</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Charged on the strong one, when chance was afforded,</span>
<span>Heated and war-grim, seized on his neck</span>
<span>With teeth that were bitter; he bloody did wax with</span>
<span>Soul-gore seething; sword-blood in waves boiled.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXVI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The passage ‘<i>Brand … burnie</i>,’ is much disputed. In the first place,
some eminent critics assume a gap of at least two half-verses.—‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Úrum</span>’ (2660),
being a peculiar form, has been much discussed. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Byrdu-scrúd</span>’ is also a crux.
B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">býwdu-scrúd</span>’ = <i>splendid vestments</i>. Nor is ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">bám</span>’ accepted by all,
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">béon</span>’ being suggested. Whatever the individual words, the passage must
mean, “<i>I intend to share with him my equipments of defence</i>.”
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXVI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> B. would render: <i>Which, as I heard, excelled in stroke every sword that
he carried to the strife, even the strongest (sword).</i> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þonne</span>’ he reads
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þone</span>,’ rel. pr.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXVII">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_91">[91]</span>
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXVII">XXXVII.</a></h2><h2>THE FATAL STRUGGLE.—BEOWULF’S LAST MOMENTS.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf defends
Beowulf.</span>
<span>Then I heard that at need of the king of the people</span>
<span>The upstanding earlman exhibited prowess,</span>
<span>Vigor and courage, as suited his nature;</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXVII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup>He his head did not guard, but the high-minded liegeman’s</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Hand was consumed, when he succored his kinsman,</span>
<span>So he struck the strife-bringing strange-comer lower,</span>
<span>Earl-thane in armor, that <i>in</i> went the weapon</span>
<span>Gleaming and plated, that ’gan then the fire<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXVII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf draws
his knife,</span>
<span>Later to lessen. The liegelord himself then</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Retained his consciousness, brandished his war-knife,</span>
<span>Battle-sharp, bitter, that he bare on his armor:</span>
<span class="sidenote">and cuts the
dragon.</span>
<span>The Weder-lord cut the worm in the middle.</span>
<span>They had felled the enemy (life drove out then<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVII.FNDEF.3" id="XXXVII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>Puissant prowess), the pair had destroyed him,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Land-chiefs related: so a liegeman should prove him,</span>
<span>A thaneman when needed. To the prince ’twas the last of</span>
<span>His era of conquest by his own great achievements,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_92">[92]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s wound
swells and burns.</span>
<span>The latest of world-deeds. The wound then began</span>
<span>Which the earth-dwelling dragon erstwhile had wrought him</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>To burn and to swell. He soon then discovered</span>
<span>That bitterest bale-woe in his bosom was raging,</span>
<span>Poison within. The atheling advanced then,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He sits down exhausted.</span>
<span>That along by the wall, he prudent of spirit</span>
<span>Might sit on a settle; he saw the giant-work,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>How arches of stone strengthened with pillars</span>
<span>The earth-hall eternal inward supported.</span>
<span>Then the long-worthy liegeman laved with his hand the</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf bathes his
lord’s head.</span>
<span>Far-famous chieftain, gory from sword-edge,</span>
<span>Refreshing the face of his friend-lord and ruler,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Sated with battle, unbinding his helmet.</span>
<span>Beowulf answered, of his injury spake he,</span>
<span>His wound that was fatal (he was fully aware</span>
<span>He had lived his allotted life-days enjoying</span>
<span>The pleasures of earth; then past was entirely</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>His measure of days, death very near):</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf regrets
that he has no son.</span>
<span>“My son I would give now my battle-equipments,</span>
<span>Had any of heirs been after me granted,</span>
<span>Along of my body. This people I governed</span>
<span>Fifty of winters: no king ’mong my neighbors</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Dared to encounter me with comrades-in-battle,</span>
<span>Try me with terror. The time to me ordered</span>
<span>I bided at home, mine own kept fitly,</span>
<span>Sought me no snares, swore me not many</span>
<span class="sidenote">I can rejoice in a
well-spent life.</span>
<span>Oaths in injustice. Joy over all this</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>I’m able to have, though ill with my death-wounds;</span>
<span>Hence the Ruler of Earthmen need not charge me</span>
<span>With the killing of kinsmen, when cometh my life out</span>
<span>Forth from my body. Fare thou with haste now</span>
<span class="sidenote">Bring me the
hoard, Wiglaf, that
my dying eyes may
be refreshed by a
sight of it.</span>
<span>To behold the hoard ’neath the hoar-grayish stone,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Well-lovèd Wiglaf, now the worm is a-lying,</span>
<span>Sore-wounded sleepeth, disseized of his treasure.</span>
<span>Go thou in haste that treasures of old I,</span>
<span>Gold-wealth may gaze on, together see lying</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_93">[93]</span>
<span>The ether-bright jewels, be easier able,</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Having the heap of hoard-gems, to yield my</span>
<span>Life and the land-folk whom long I have governed.”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXVII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. renders: <i>He</i> (<i>W</i>.) did not regard his (<i>the dragon’s</i>) <i>head</i> (since
Beowulf had struck it without effect), <i>but struck the dragon a little lower down.—</i>One
crux is to find out <i>whose head</i> is meant; another is to bring out the
antithesis between ‘head’ and ‘hand.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXVII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þæt þæt fýr</span>’ (2702), S. emends to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þá þæt fýr</span>’ = <i>when the fire began to
grow less intense afterward</i>. This emendation relieves the passage of a
plethora of conjunctive <i lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæt</i>’s.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXVII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefyldan</span>’ (2707), S. proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefylde</span>.’ The passage would read:
<i>He felled the foe (life drove out strength), and they then both had destroyed him,
chieftains related</i>. This gives Beowulf the credit of having felled the dragon;
then they combine to annihilate him.—For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ellen</span>’ (2707), Kl. suggests
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">e(a)llne</span>.’—The reading ‘<i>life drove out strength</i>’ is very unsatisfactory and
very peculiar. I would suggest as follows: Adopt S.’s emendation, remove
H.’s parenthesis, read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ferh-ellen wræc</span>,’ and translate: <i>He felled the foe,
drove out his life-strength</i> (that is, made him <i>hors de combat</i>), <i>and then they
both, etc</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXVIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXVIII">XXXVIII.</a></h2><h2>WIGLAF PLUNDERS THE DRAGON’S DEN.—BEOWULF’S
DEATH.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf fulfils his
lord’s behest.</span>
<span>Then heard I that Wihstan’s son very quickly,</span>
<span>These words being uttered, heeded his liegelord</span>
<span>Wounded and war-sick, went in his armor,</span>
<span>His well-woven ring-mail, ’neath the roof of the barrow.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Then the trusty retainer treasure-gems many</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon’s den.</span>
<span>Victorious saw, when the seat he came near to,</span>
<span>Gold-treasure sparkling spread on the bottom,</span>
<span>Wonder on the wall, and the worm-creature’s cavern,</span>
<span>The ancient dawn-flier’s, vessels a-standing,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Cups of the ancients of cleansers bereavèd,</span>
<span>Robbed of their ornaments: there were helmets in numbers,</span>
<span>Old and rust-eaten, arm-bracelets many,</span>
<span>Artfully woven. Wealth can easily,</span>
<span>Gold on the sea-bottom, turn into vanity<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXVIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Each one of earthmen, arm him who pleaseth!</span>
<span>And he saw there lying an all-golden banner</span>
<span>High o’er the hoard, of hand-wonders greatest,</span>
<span>Linkèd with lacets: a light from it sparkled,</span>
<span>That the floor of the cavern he was able to look on,</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon is not
there.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>To examine the jewels. Sight of the dragon</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_94">[94]</span>
<span>Not any was offered, but edge offcarried him.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf bears the
hoard away.</span>
<span>Then I heard that the hero the hoard-treasure plundered,</span>
<span>The giant-work ancient reaved in the cavern,</span>
<span>Bare on his bosom the beakers and platters,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>As himself would fain have it, and took off the standard,</span>
<span>The brightest of beacons;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXVIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> the bill had erst injured</span>
<span>(Its edge was of iron), the old-ruler’s weapon,</span>
<span>Him who long had watched as ward of the jewels,</span>
<span>Who fire-terror carried hot for the treasure,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Rolling in battle, in middlemost darkness,</span>
<span>Till murdered he perished. The messenger hastened,</span>
<span>Not loth to return, hurried by jewels:</span>
<span>Curiosity urged him if, excellent-mooded,</span>
<span>Alive he should find the lord of the Weders</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Mortally wounded, at the place where he left him.</span>
<span>’Mid the jewels he found then the famous old chieftain,</span>
<span>His liegelord belovèd, at his life’s-end gory:</span>
<span>He thereupon ’gan to lave him with water,</span>
<span>Till the point of his word piercèd his breast-hoard.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Beowulf spake (the gold-gems he noticed),</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is rejoiced
to see the jewels.</span>
<span>The old one in sorrow: “For the jewels I look on</span>
<span>Thanks do I utter for all to the Ruler,</span>
<span>Wielder of Worship, with words of devotion,</span>
<span>The Lord everlasting, that He let me such treasures</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Gain for my people ere death overtook me.</span>
<span>Since I’ve bartered the agèd life to me granted</span>
<span>For treasure of jewels, attend ye henceforward</span>
<span class="sidenote">He desires to be
held in memory by
his people.</span>
<span>The wants of the war-thanes; I can wait here no longer.</span>
<span>The battle-famed bid ye to build them a grave-hill,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Bright when I’m burned, at the brim-current’s limit;</span>
<span>As a memory-mark to the men I have governed,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_95">[95]</span>
<span>Aloft it shall tower on Whale’s-Ness uprising,</span>
<span>That earls of the ocean hereafter may call it</span>
<span>Beowulf’s barrow, those who barks ever-dashing</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>From a distance shall drive o’er the darkness of waters.”</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hero’s last
gift</span>
<span>The bold-mooded troop-lord took from his neck then</span>
<span>The ring that was golden, gave to his liegeman,</span>
<span>The youthful war-hero, his gold-flashing helmet,</span>
<span>His collar and war-mail, bade him well to enjoy them:</span>
<span class="sidenote">and last words.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>“Thou art latest left of the line of our kindred,</span>
<span>Of Wægmunding people: Weird hath offcarried</span>
<span>All of my kinsmen to the Creator’s glory,</span>
<span>Earls in their vigor: I shall after them fare.”</span>
<span>’Twas the aged liegelord’s last-spoken word in</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>His musings of spirit, ere he mounted the fire,</span>
<span>The battle-waves burning: from his bosom departed</span>
<span>His soul to seek the sainted ones’ glory.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXVIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The word ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oferhígian</span>’ (2767) being vague and little understood, two
quite distinct translations of this passage have arisen. One takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oferhígian</span>’
as meaning ‘to exceed,’ and, inserting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord</span>’ after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehwone</span>,’ renders: <i>The
treasure may easily, the gold in the ground, exceed in value every hoard of
man, hide it who will.</i> The other takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oferhígian</span>’ as meaning ‘to render
arrogant,’ and, giving the sentence a moralizing tone, renders substantially as
in the body of this work. (Cf. <a href="#L.XXVIII.13">28 <span class="smaller">13</span></a> et seq.)
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXVIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The passage beginning here is very much disputed. ‘The bill of the old
lord’ is by some regarded as Beowulf’s sword; by others, as that of the
ancient possessor of the hoard. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Ær gescód</span>’ (2778), translated in this work
as verb and adverb, is by some regarded as a compound participial adj. =
<i>sheathed in brass</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XXXIX">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXIX">XXXIX.</a></h2><h2>THE DEAD FOES.—WIGLAF’S BITTER TAUNTS.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf is sorely
grieved to see his
lord look so un-warlike.</span>
<span>It had wofully chanced then the youthful retainer</span>
<span>To behold on earth the most ardent-belovèd</span>
<span>At his life-days’ limit, lying there helpless.</span>
<span>The slayer too lay there, of life all bereavèd,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Horrible earth-drake, harassed with sorrow:</span>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon has
plundered his last
hoard.</span>
<span>The round-twisted monster was permitted no longer</span>
<span>To govern the ring-hoards, but edges of war-swords</span>
<span>Mightily seized him, battle-sharp, sturdy</span>
<span>Leavings of hammers, that still from his wounds</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>The flier-from-farland fell to the earth</span>
<span>Hard by his hoard-house, hopped he at midnight</span>
<span>Not e’er through the air, nor exulting in jewels</span>
<span>Suffered them to see him: but he sank then to earthward</span>
<span>Through the hero-chief’s handwork. I heard sure it throve then</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_96">[96]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Few warriors
dared to face the
monster.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>But few in the land of liegemen of valor,</span>
<span>Though of every achievement bold he had proved him,</span>
<span>To run ’gainst the breath of the venomous scather,</span>
<span>Or the hall of the treasure to trouble with hand-blows,</span>
<span>If he watching had found the ward of the hoard-hall</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>On the barrow abiding. Beowulf’s part of</span>
<span>The treasure of jewels was paid for with death;</span>
<span>Each of the twain had attained to the end of</span>
<span>Life so unlasting. Not long was the time till</span>
<span class="sidenote">The cowardly
thanes come out
of the thicket.</span>
<span>The tardy-at-battle returned from the thicket,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>The timid truce-breakers ten all together,</span>
<span>Who durst not before play with the lances</span>
<span>In the prince of the people’s pressing emergency;</span>
<span class="sidenote">They are ashamed
of their desertion.</span>
<span>But blushing with shame, with shields they betook them,</span>
<span>With arms and armor where the old one was lying:</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>They gazed upon Wiglaf. He was sitting exhausted,</span>
<span>Foot-going fighter, not far from the shoulders</span>
<span>Of the lord of the people, would rouse him with water;</span>
<span>No whit did it help him; though he hoped for it keenly,</span>
<span>He was able on earth not at all in the leader</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Life to retain, and nowise to alter</span>
<span>The will of the Wielder; the World-Ruler’s power<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIX.FNDEF.1" id="XXXIX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Would govern the actions of each one of heroes,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf is ready to
excoriate them.</span>
<span>As yet He is doing. From the young one forthwith then</span>
<span>Could grim-worded greeting be got for him quickly</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Whose courage had failed him. Wiglaf discoursed then,</span>
<span>Weohstan his son, sad-mooded hero,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He begins to taunt
them.</span>
<span>Looked on the hated: “He who soothness will utter</span>
<span>Can say that the liegelord who gave you the jewels,</span>
<span>The ornament-armor wherein ye are standing,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>When on ale-bench often he offered to hall-men</span>
<span>Helmet and burnie, the prince to his liegemen,</span>
<span>As best upon earth he was able to find him,—</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_97">[97]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Surely our lord
wasted his armor
on poltroons.</span>
<span>That he wildly wasted his war-gear undoubtedly</span>
<span>When battle o’ertook him.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIX.FNDEF.2" id="XXXIX.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> The troop-king no need had</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>To glory in comrades; yet God permitted him,</span>
<span class="sidenote">He, however, got
along without you</span>
<span>Victory-Wielder, with weapon unaided</span>
<span>Himself to avenge, when vigor was needed.</span>
<span>I life-protection but little was able</span>
<span>To give him in battle, and I ’gan, notwithstanding,</span>
<span class="sidenote">With some aid, I
could have saved
our liegelord</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>Helping my kinsman (my strength overtaxing):</span>
<span>He waxed the weaker when with weapon I smote on</span>
<span>My mortal opponent, the fire less strongly</span>
<span>Flamed from his bosom. Too few of protectors</span>
<span>Came round the king at the critical moment.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Gift-giving is over
with your people:
the ring-lord is
dead.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Now must ornament-taking and weapon-bestowing,</span>
<span>Home-joyance all, cease for your kindred,</span>
<span>Food for the people; each of your warriors</span>
<span>Must needs be bereavèd of rights that he holdeth</span>
<span>In landed possessions, when faraway nobles</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Shall learn of your leaving your lord so basely,</span>
<span class="sidenote">What is life without
honor?</span>
<span>The dastardly deed. Death is more pleasant</span>
<span>To every earlman than infamous life is!”</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXIX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">dædum rædan</span>’ (2859) B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déað árædan</span>,’ and renders: <i>The
might (or judgment) of God would determine death for every man, as he still
does.</i>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXIX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Some critics, H. himself in earlier editions, put the clause, ‘When …
him’ (A.-S. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þá … beget</span>’) with the following sentence; that is, they make it
dependent upon ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þorfte</span>’ (2875) instead of upon ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">forwurpe</span>’ (2873).
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XL">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XL">XL.</a></h2><h2>THE MESSENGER OF DEATH.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf sends the
news of Beowulf’s
death to liegemen
near by.</span>
<span>Then he charged that the battle be announced at the hedge</span>
<span>Up o’er the cliff-edge, where the earl-troopers bided</span>
<span>The whole of the morning, mood-wretched sat them,</span>
<span>Bearers of battle-shields, both things expecting,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>The end of his lifetime and the coming again of</span>
<span>The liegelord belovèd. Little reserved he</span>
<span>Of news that was known, who the ness-cliff did travel,</span>
<span>But he truly discoursed to all that could hear him:</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_98">[98]</span>
<span class="sidenote">The messenger
speaks.</span>
<span>“Now the free-giving friend-lord of the folk of the Weders,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>The folk-prince of Geatmen, is fast in his death-bed,</span>
<span>By the deeds of the dragon in death-bed abideth;</span>
<span>Along with him lieth his life-taking foeman</span>
<span>Slain with knife-wounds: he was wholly unable</span>
<span>To injure at all the ill-planning monster</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf sits by our
dead lord.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>With bite of his sword-edge. Wiglaf is sitting,</span>
<span>Offspring of Wihstan, up over Beowulf,</span>
<span>Earl o’er another whose end-day hath reached him,</span>
<span>Head-watch holdeth o’er heroes unliving,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XL.FNDEF.1" id="XL.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">Our lord’s death
will lead to
attacks from our
old foes.</span>
<span>For friend and for foeman. The folk now expecteth</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>A season of strife when the death of the folk-king</span>
<span>To Frankmen and Frisians in far-lands is published.</span>
<span>The war-hatred waxed warm ’gainst the Hugmen,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac’s death
recalled.</span>
<span>When Higelac came with an army of vessels</span>
<span>Faring to Friesland, where the Frankmen in battle</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Humbled him and bravely with overmight ’complished</span>
<span>That the mail-clad warrior must sink in the battle,</span>
<span>Fell ’mid his folk-troop: no fret-gems presented</span>
<span>The atheling to earlmen; aye was denied us</span>
<span>Merewing’s mercy. The men of the Swedelands</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>For truce or for truth trust I but little;</span>
<span>But widely ’twas known that near Ravenswood Ongentheow</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hæthcyn’s fall
referred to.</span>
<span>Sundered Hæthcyn the Hrethling from life-joys,</span>
<span>When for pride overweening the War-Scylfings first did</span>
<span>Seek the Geatmen with savage intentions.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Early did Ohthere’s age-laden father,</span>
<span>Old and terrible, give blow in requital,</span>
<span>Killing the sea-king, the queen-mother rescued,</span>
<span>The old one his consort deprived of her gold,</span>
<span>Onela’s mother and Ohthere’s also,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_99">[99]</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>And then followed the feud-nursing foemen till hardly,</span>
<span>Reaved of their ruler, they Ravenswood entered.</span>
<span>Then with vast-numbered forces he assaulted the remnant,</span>
<span>Weary with wounds, woe often promised</span>
<span>The livelong night to the sad-hearted war-troop:</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Said he at morning would kill them with edges of weapons,</span>
<span>Some on the gallows for glee to the fowls.</span>
<span>Aid came after to the anxious-in-spirit</span>
<span>At dawn of the day, after Higelac’s bugle</span>
<span>And trumpet-sound heard they, when the good one proceeded</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>And faring followed the flower of the troopers.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XL.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XL.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Hige-méðum</span>’ (2910) is glossed by H. as dat. plu. (= for the dead). S.
proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hige-méðe</span>,’ nom. sing. limiting Wigláf; i.e. <i>W., mood-weary, holds
head-watch o’er friend and foe</i>.—B. suggests taking the word as dat. inst.
plu. of an abstract noun in -‘u.’ The translation would be substantially the
same as S.’s.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XLI">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XLI">XLI.</a></h2><h2>THE MESSENGER’S RETROSPECT.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">The messenger
continues, and
refers to the feuds
of Swedes and
Geats.</span>
<span>“The blood-stainèd trace of Swedes and Geatmen,</span>
<span>The death-rush of warmen, widely was noticed,</span>
<span>How the folks with each other feud did awaken.</span>
<span>The worthy one went then<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.1" id="XLI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> with well-beloved comrades,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Old and dejected to go to the fastness,</span>
<span>Ongentheo earl upward then turned him;</span>
<span>Of Higelac’s battle he’d heard on inquiry,</span>
<span>The exultant one’s prowess, despaired of resistance,</span>
<span>With earls of the ocean to be able to struggle,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>’Gainst sea-going sailors to save the hoard-treasure,</span>
<span>His wife and his children; he fled after thenceward</span>
<span>Old ’neath the earth-wall. Then was offered pursuance</span>
<span>To the braves of the Swedemen, the banner<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.2" id="XLI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> to Higelac.</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_100">[100]</span>
<span>They fared then forth o’er the field-of-protection,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>When the Hrethling heroes hedgeward had thronged them.</span>
<span>Then with edges of irons was Ongentheow driven,</span>
<span>The gray-haired to tarry, that the troop-ruler had to</span>
<span>Suffer the power solely of Eofor:</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wulf wounds
Ongentheow.</span>
<span>Wulf then wildly with weapon assaulted him,</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>Wonred his son, that for swinge of the edges</span>
<span>The blood from his body burst out in currents,</span>
<span>Forth ’neath his hair. He feared not however,</span>
<span>Gray-headed Scylfing, but speedily quited</span>
<span class="sidenote">Ongentheow gives
a stout blow in
return.</span>
<span>The wasting wound-stroke with worse exchange,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>When the king of the thane-troop thither did turn him:</span>
<span>The wise-mooded son of Wonred was powerless</span>
<span>To give a return-blow to the age-hoary man,</span>
<span>But his head-shielding helmet first hewed he to pieces,</span>
<span>That flecked with gore perforce he did totter,</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>Fell to the earth; not fey was he yet then,</span>
<span>But up did he spring though an edge-wound had reached him.</span>
<span class="sidenote">Eofor smites Ongentheow
fiercely.</span>
<span>Then Higelac’s vassal, valiant and dauntless,</span>
<span>When his brother lay dead, made his broad-bladed weapon,</span>
<span>Giant-sword ancient, defence of the giants,</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Bound o’er the shield-wall; the folk-prince succumbed then,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Ongentheow is
slain.</span>
<span>Shepherd of people, was pierced to the vitals.</span>
<span>There were many attendants who bound up his kinsman,</span>
<span>Carried him quickly when occasion was granted</span>
<span>That the place of the slain they were suffered to manage.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>This pending, one hero plundered the other,</span>
<span>His armor of iron from Ongentheow ravished,</span>
<span>His hard-sword hilted and helmet together;</span>
<span class="sidenote">Eofor takes the
old king’s war-gear
to Higelac.</span>
<span>The old one’s equipments he carried to Higelac.</span>
<span>He the jewels received, and rewards ’mid the troopers</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Graciously promised, and so did accomplish:</span>
<span>The king of the Weders requited the war-rush,</span>
<span>Hrethel’s descendant, when home he repaired him,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac rewards
the brothers.</span>
<span>To Eofor and Wulf with wide-lavished treasures,</span>
<span>To each of them granted a hundred of thousands</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_101">[101]</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>In land and rings wrought out of wire:</span>
<span class="sidenote">His gifts were beyond
cavil.</span>
<span>None upon mid-earth needed to twit him<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.3" id="XLI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>With the gifts he gave them, when glory they conquered;</span>
<span class="sidenote">To Eofor he also
gives his only
daughter in marriage.</span>
<span>And to Eofor then gave he his one only daughter,</span>
<span>The honor of home, as an earnest of favor.</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>That’s the feud and hatred—as ween I ’twill happen—</span>
<span>The anger of earthmen, that earls of the Swedemen</span>
<span>Will visit on us, when they hear that our leader</span>
<span>Lifeless is lying, he who longtime protected</span>
<span>His hoard and kingdom ’gainst hating assailers,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Who on the fall of the heroes defended of yore</span>
<span>The deed-mighty Scyldings,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.4" id="XLI.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> did for the troopers</span>
<span>What best did avail them, and further moreover</span>
<span class="sidenote">It is time for us to
pay the last marks
of respect to our
lord.</span>
<span>Hero-deeds ’complished.  Now is haste most fitting,</span>
<span>That the lord of liegemen we look upon yonder,</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>And <i>that</i> one carry on journey to death-pyre</span>
<span>Who ring-presents gave us. Not aught of it all</span>
<span>Shall melt with the brave one—there’s a mass of bright jewels,</span>
<span>Gold beyond measure, grewsomely purchased</span>
<span>And ending it all ornament-rings too</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>Bought with his life; these fire shall devour,</span>
<span>Flame shall cover, no earlman shall wear</span>
<span>A jewel-memento, nor beautiful virgin</span>
<span>Have on her neck rings to adorn her,</span>
<span>But wretched in spirit bereavèd of gold-gems</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>She shall oft with others be exiled and banished,</span>
<span>Since the leader of liegemen hath laughter forsaken,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_102">[102]</span>
<span>Mirth and merriment. Hence many a war-spear</span>
<span>Cold from the morning shall be clutched in the fingers,</span>
<span>Heaved in the hand, no harp-music’s sound shall</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<span>Waken the warriors, but the wan-coated raven</span>
<span>Fain over fey ones freely shall gabble,</span>
<span>Shall say to the eagle how he sped in the eating,</span>
<span>When, the wolf his companion, he plundered the slain.”</span>
<span>So the high-minded hero was rehearsing these stories</span>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<span>Loathsome to hear; he lied as to few of</span>
<span class="sidenote">The warriors go
sadly to look at
Beowulf’s lifeless
body.</span>
<span>Weirds and of words. All the war-troop arose then,</span>
<span>’Neath the Eagle’s Cape sadly betook them,</span>
<span>Weeping and woful, the wonder to look at.</span>
<span>They saw on the sand then soulless a-lying,</span>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<span>His slaughter-bed holding, him who rings had given them</span>
<span>In days that were done; then the death-bringing moment</span>
<span>Was come to the good one, that the king very warlike,</span>
<span>Wielder of Weders, with wonder-death perished.</span>
<span>First they beheld there a creature more wondrous,</span>
<span class="sidenote">They also see the
dragon.</span>
<span class="linenum">95</span>
<span>The worm on the field, in front of them lying,</span>
<span>The foeman before them: the fire-spewing dragon,</span>
<span>Ghostly and grisly guest in his terrors,</span>
<span>Was scorched in the fire; as he lay there he measured</span>
<span>Fifty of feet; came forth in the night-time<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.5" id="XLI.FNREF.5">5</a></sup></span>
<span class="linenum">100</span>
<span>To rejoice in the air, thereafter departing</span>
<span>To visit his den; he in death was then fastened,</span>
<span>He would joy in no other earth-hollowed caverns.</span>
<span>There stood round about him beakers and vessels,</span>
<span>Dishes were lying and dear-valued weapons,</span>
<span class="linenum">105</span>
<span>With iron-rust eaten, as in earth’s mighty bosom</span>
<span>A thousand of winters there they had rested:</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hoard was
under a magic
spell.</span>
<span>That mighty bequest then with magic was guarded,</span>
<span>Gold of the ancients, that earlman not any</span>
<span>The ring-hall could touch, save Ruling-God only,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_103">[103]</span>
<span class="linenum">110</span>
<span>Sooth-king of Vict’ries gave whom He wished to</span>
<span class="sidenote">God alone could
give access to it.</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.6" id="XLI.FNREF.6">6</a></sup>(He is earth-folk’s protector) to open the treasure,</span>
<span>E’en to such among mortals as seemed to Him proper.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">góda</span>,’ which seems a surprising epithet for a Geat to apply to the
“terrible” Ongentheow, B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gomela</span>.’ The passage would then
stand: ‘<i>The old one went then,’ etc.</i>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">segn Higeláce</span>,’ K., Th., and B. propose ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">segn Higeláces</span>,’ meaning:
<i>Higelac’s banner followed the Swedes (in pursuit).</i>—S. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sæcc Higeláces</span>,’
and renders: <i>Higelac’s pursuit.</i>—The H.-So. reading, as translated in
our text, means that the banner of the enemy was captured and brought to
Higelac as a trophy.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The rendering given in this translation represents the king as being generous
beyond the possibility of reproach; but some authorities construe ‘him’
(2996) as plu., and understand the passage to mean that no one reproached
the two brothers with having received more reward than they were entitled to.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.4">[4]</a> The name ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Scyldingas</span>’ here (3006) has caused much discussion, and given
rise to several theories, the most important of which are as follows: (1) After
the downfall of Hrothgar’s family, Beowulf was king of the Danes, or Scyldings.
(2) For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Scyldingas</span>’ read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Scylfingas</span>’—that is, after killing Eadgils,
the Scylfing prince, Beowulf conquered his land, and held it in subjection.
(3) M. considers 3006 a thoughtless repetition of 2053. (Cf. H.-So.)
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.5">[5]</a> B. takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">nihtes</span>’ and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwílum</span>’ (3045) as separate adverbial cases, and
renders: <i>Joy in the air had he of yore by night, etc</i>. He thinks that the idea of
vanished time ought to be expressed.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.6">[6]</a> The parenthesis is by some emended so as to read: (1) (<i>He</i> (i.e. <i>God</i>)
<i>is the hope of men</i>); (2) (<i>he is the hope of heroes</i>). Gr.’s reading has no
parenthesis, but says: … <i>could touch, unless God himself, true king of victories,
gave to whom he would to open the treasure, the secret place of enchanters,
etc</i>. The last is rejected on many grounds.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XLII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XLII">XLII.</a></h2><h2>WIGLAF’S SAD STORY.—THE HOARD CARRIED OFF.</h2>
<span>Then ’twas seen that the journey prospered him little</span>
<span>Who wrongly within had the ornaments hidden<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.1" id="XLII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></span>
<span>Down ’neath the wall. The warden erst slaughtered</span>
<span>Some few of the folk-troop: the feud then thereafter</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Was hotly avengèd. ’Tis a wonder where,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.2" id="XLII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></span>
<span>When the strength-famous trooper has attained to the end of</span>
<span>Life-days allotted, then no longer the man may</span>
<span>Remain with his kinsmen where mead-cups are flowing.</span>
<span>So to Beowulf happened when the ward of the barrow,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Assaults, he sought for: himself had no knowledge</span>
<span>How his leaving this life was likely to happen.</span>
<span>So to doomsday, famous folk-leaders down did</span>
<span>Call it with curses—who ’complished it there—</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_104">[104]</span>
<span>That that man should be ever of ill-deeds convicted,</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>Confined in foul-places, fastened in hell-bonds,</span>
<span>Punished with plagues, who this place should e’er ravage.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.3" id="XLII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></span>
<span>He cared not for gold: rather the Wielder’s</span>
<span>Favor preferred he first to get sight of.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.4" id="XLII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf addresses
his comrades.</span>
<span>Wiglaf discoursed then, Wihstan his son:</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>“Oft many an earlman on one man’s account must</span>
<span>Sorrow endure, as to us it hath happened.</span>
<span>The liegelord belovèd we could little prevail on,</span>
<span>Kingdom’s keeper, counsel to follow,</span>
<span>Not to go to the guardian of the gold-hoard, but let him</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>Lie where he long was, live in his dwelling</span>
<span>Till the end of the world. Met we a destiny</span>
<span>Hard to endure: the hoard has been looked at,</span>
<span>Been gained very grimly; too grievous the fate that<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.5" id="XLII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup></span>
<span>The prince of the people pricked to come thither.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span><i>I</i> was therein and all of it looked at,</span>
<span>The building’s equipments, since access was given me,</span>
<span>Not kindly at all entrance permitted</span>
<span class="sidenote">He tells them of
Beowulf’s last
moments.</span>
<span>Within under earth-wall. Hastily seized I</span>
<span>And held in my hands a huge-weighing burden</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>Of hoard-treasures costly, hither out bare them</span>
<span>To my liegelord belovèd: life was yet in him,</span>
<span>And consciousness also; the old one discoursed then</span>
<span>Much and mournfully, commanded to greet you,</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s dying
request.</span>
<span>Bade that remembering the deeds of your friend-lord</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>Ye build on the fire-hill of corpses a lofty</span>
<span>Burial-barrow, broad and far-famous,</span>
<span>As ’mid world-dwelling warriors he was widely most honored</span>
<span>While he reveled in riches. Let us rouse us and hasten</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_105">[105]</span>
<span>Again to see and seek for the treasure,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>The wonder ’neath wall. The way I will show you,</span>
<span>That close ye may look at ring-gems sufficient</span>
<span>And gold in abundance. Let the bier with promptness</span>
<span>Fully be fashioned, when forth we shall come,</span>
<span>And lift we our lord, then, where long he shall tarry,</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<span>Well-beloved warrior, ’neath the Wielder’s protection.”</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf charges
them to build a
funeral-pyre.</span>
<span>Then the son of Wihstan bade orders be given,</span>
<span>Mood-valiant man, to many of heroes,</span>
<span>Holders of homesteads, that they hither from far,</span>
<span><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.6" id="XLII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup>Leaders of liegemen, should look for the good one</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<span>With wood for his pyre: “The flame shall now swallow</span>
<span>(The wan fire shall wax<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.7" id="XLII.FNREF.7">7</a></sup>) the warriors’ leader</span>
<span>Who the rain of the iron often abided,</span>
<span>When, sturdily hurled, the storm of the arrows</span>
<span>Leapt o’er linden-wall, the lance rendered service,</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<span>Furnished with feathers followed the arrow.”</span>
<span>Now the wise-mooded son of Wihstan did summon</span>
<span>The best of the braves from the band of the ruler</span>
<span class="sidenote">He takes seven
thanes, and enters
the den.</span>
<span>Seven together; ’neath the enemy’s roof he</span>
<span>Went with the seven; one of the heroes</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<span>Who fared at the front, a fire-blazing torch-light</span>
<span>Bare in his hand. No lot then decided</span>
<span>Who that hoard should havoc, when hero-earls saw it</span>
<span>Lying in the cavern uncared-for entirely,</span>
<span>Rusting to ruin: they rued then but little</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<span>That they hastily hence hauled out the treasure,</span>
<span class="sidenote">They push the
dragon over the
wall.</span>
<span>The dear-valued jewels; the dragon eke pushed they,</span>
<span>The worm o’er the wall, let the wave-currents take him,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_106">[106]</span>
<span>The waters enwind the ward of the treasures.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The hoard is laid
on a wain.</span>
<span>There wounden gold on a wain was uploaded,</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<span>A mass unmeasured, the men-leader off then,</span>
<span>The hero hoary, to Whale’s-Ness was carried.</span>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehýdde</span>,’ B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehýðde</span>’: the passage would stand as above
except the change of ‘hidden’ (v. 2) to ‘plundered.’ The reference, however,
would be to the thief, not to the dragon.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The passage ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Wundur … búan</span>’ (3063-3066), M. took to be a question
asking whether it was strange that a man should die when his appointed time
had come.—B. sees a corruption, and makes emendations introducing the
idea that a brave man should not die from sickness or from old age, but should
find death in the performance of some deed of daring.—S. sees an indirect
question introduced by ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwár</span>’ and dependent upon ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wundur</span>’: <i>A secret is it
when the hero is to die, etc</i>.—Why may the two clauses not be parallel, and
the whole passage an Old English cry of ‘<i>How wonderful is death!’?</i>—S.’s
is the best yet offered, if ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wundor</span>’ means ‘mystery.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">strude</span>’ in H.-So., S. suggests ‘stride.’ This would require ‘ravage’
(v. 16) to be changed to ‘tread.’
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> ‘He cared … sight of’ (17, 18), S. emends so as to read as follows:
<i>He (Beowulf) had not before seen the favor of the avaricious possessor.</i>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> B. renders: <i>That which drew the king thither</i> (i.e. <i>the treasure</i>) <i>was
granted us, but in such a way that it overcomes us.</i>
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Folc-ágende</span>’ (3114) B. takes as dat. sing. with ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gódum</span>,’ and refers it to
Beowulf; that is, <i>Should bring fire-wood to the place where the good folk-ruler
lay</i>.
</span>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.7">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.7">[7]</a> C. proposes to take ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">weaxan</span>’ = L. ‘<span class="la" lang="la" xml:lang="la">vescor</span>,’ and translate <i>devour</i>. This
gives a parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fretan</span>’ above. The parenthesis would be discarded and
the passage read: <i>Now shall the fire consume, the wan-flame devour, the
prince of warriors, etc</i>.
</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="fit" id="XLIII">
<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XLIII">XLIII.</a></h2><h2>THE BURNING OF BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s pyre.</span>
<span>The folk of the Geatmen got him then ready</span>
<span>A pile on the earth strong for the burning,</span>
<span>Behung with helmets, hero-knights’ targets,</span>
<span>And bright-shining burnies, as he begged they should have them;</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<span>Then wailing war-heroes their world-famous chieftain,</span>
<span>Their liegelord beloved, laid in the middle.</span>
<span class="sidenote">The funeral-flame.</span>
<span>Soldiers began then to make on the barrow</span>
<span>The largest of dead-fires: dark o’er the vapor</span>
<span>The smoke-cloud ascended, the sad-roaring fire,</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<span>Mingled with weeping (the wind-roar subsided)</span>
<span>Till the building of bone it had broken to pieces,</span>
<span>Hot in the heart. Heavy in spirit</span>
<span>They mood-sad lamented the men-leader’s ruin;</span>
<span>And mournful measures the much-grieving widow</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<span>*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</span>
<span class="sidenote">The Weders carry
out their lord’s last
request.</span>
<span>The men of the Weders made accordingly</span>
<span>A hill on the height, high and extensive,</span>
<span>Of sea-going sailors to be seen from a distance,</span>
<span>And the brave one’s beacon built where the fire was,</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<span>In ten-days’ space, with a wall surrounded it,</span>
<span>As wisest of world-folk could most worthily plan it.</span>
<span>They placed in the barrow rings and jewels,</span>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_107">[107]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Rings and gems
are laid in the
barrow.</span>
<span>All such ornaments as erst in the treasure</span>
<span>War-mooded men had won in possession:</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<span>The earnings of earlmen to earth they entrusted,</span>
<span>The gold to the dust, where yet it remaineth</span>
<span>As useless to mortals as in foregoing eras.</span>
<span>’Round the dead-mound rode then the doughty-in-battle,</span>
<span>Bairns of all twelve of the chiefs of the people,</span>
<span class="sidenote">They mourn for
their lord, and sing
his praises.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<span>More would they mourn, lament for their ruler,</span>
<span>Speak in measure, mention him with pleasure,</span>
<span>Weighed his worth, and his warlike achievements</span>
<span>Mightily commended, as ’tis meet one praise his</span>
<span>Liegelord in words and love him in spirit,</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<span>When forth from his body he fares to destruction.</span>
<span>So lamented mourning the men of the Geats,</span>
<span>Fond-loving vassals, the fall of their lord,</span>
<span class="sidenote">An ideal king.</span>
<span>Said he was kindest of kings under heaven,</span>
<span>Gentlest of men, most winning of manner,</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<span>Friendliest to folk-troops and fondest of honor.</span>
</span>
</span>
<div class="div1" id="ADDENDA">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_109">[109]</span>
<h2><a href="#C.ADDENDA">ADDENDA.</a></h2>
<p>
<span class="sc">Several</span> discrepancies and other oversights have been noticed in the H.-So.
glossary. Of these a good part were avoided by Harrison and Sharp, the
American editors of Beowulf, in their last edition, 1888. The rest will, I
hope, be noticed in their fourth edition. As, however, this book may fall into
the hands of some who have no copy of the American edition, it seems best
to notice all the principal oversights of the German editors.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">From hám</b> (194).—Notes and glossary conflict; the latter not having been altered
to suit the conclusions accepted in the former.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þær gelýfan sceal dryhtnes dóme</b> (440).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">dóm</span>’ H. says ‘the might of
the Lord’; while under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gelýfan</span>’ he says ‘the judgment of the Lord.’
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Eal bencþelu</b> (486).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">benc-þelu</span>’ H. says <i>nom. plu.</i>; while under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eal</span>’ he
says <i>nom. sing.</i>
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Heatho-ræmas</b> (519).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ætberan</span>’ H. translates ‘to the Heathoremes’; while
under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Heatho-ræmas</span>’ he says ‘Heathoræmas reaches Breca in the swimming-match with
Beowulf.’ Harrison and Sharp (3d edition, 1888) avoid the discrepancy.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Fáh féond-scaða</b> (554).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">féond-scaða</span>’ H. says ‘a gleaming sea-monster’;
under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fáh</span>’ he says ‘hostile.’
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Onfeng hraðe inwit-þancum</b> (749).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">onfón</span>’ H. says ‘he <i>received</i> the
maliciously-disposed one’; under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">inwit-þanc</span>’ he says ‘he <i>grasped</i>,’ etc.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Níð-wundor séon</b> (1366).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">níð-wundor</span>’ H. calls this word itself <i>nom. sing.</i>;
under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">séon</span>’ he translates it as accus. sing., understanding ‘man’ as subject of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">séon</span>.’ H.
and S. (3d edition) make the correction.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Forgeaf hilde-bille</b> (1521).—H., under the second word, calls it instr. dat.; while
under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">forgifan</span>’ he makes it the dat. of indir. obj. H. and S. (3d edition) make the change.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Brád</b> and <b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">brún-ecg</b> (1547).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">brád</span>’ H. says <span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">‘das breite Hüftmesser mit
bronzener Klinge’</span>; under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">brún-ecg</span>’ he says <span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">‘ihr breites Hüftmesser mit blitzender Klinge.’</span>
</p>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_110">[110]</span>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Yðelíce</b> (1557).—Under this word H. makes it modify ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ástód</span>.’ If this be right, the
punctuation of the fifth edition is wrong. See H. and S., appendix.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sélran gesóhte</b> (1840).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sél</span>’ and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gesécan</span>’ H. calls these two words accus.
plu.; but this is clearly an error, as both are nom. plu., pred. nom. H. and S. correct under
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sél</span>.’
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Wið sylfne</b> (1978).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wið</span>’ and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gesittan</span>’ H. says ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wið</span> = near, by’; under
‘self’ he says ‘opposite.’
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þéow</b> (2225) is omitted from the glossary.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">For duguðum</b> (2502).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">duguð</span>’ H. translates this phrase, ‘<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">in Tüchtigkeit</span>’;
under ‘for,’ by <span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">‘vor der edlen Kriegerschaar.’</span>
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þær</b> (2574).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wealdan</span>’ H. translates <i lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þær</i> by ‘<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">wo</span>’; under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">mótan</span>,’ by ‘<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">da</span>.’
H. and S. suggest ‘if’ in both passages.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Wunde</b> (2726).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wund</span>’ H. says ‘dative,’ and under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wæl-bléate</span>’ he says
‘accus.’ It is without doubt accus., parallel with ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">benne</span>.’
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Strengum gebæded</b> (3118).—Under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">strengo</span>’ H. says ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Strengum</span>’ = <span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">mit Macht</span>;
under ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gebæded</span>’ he translates ‘<span class="de" lang="de" xml:lang="de">von den Sehnen</span>.’ H. and S. correct this discrepancy by
rejecting the second reading.
</p>
<p>
<b lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Bronda be láfe</b> (3162).—A recent emendation. The fourth edition had ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">bronda
betost</span>.’ In the fifth edition the editor neglects to change the glossary to suit the new
emendation. See ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">bewyrcan</span>.’
</p>
</span>

</body>
</html>
