<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XII">XII.</a>GRENDEL AND BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel comes
from the fens.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.1">’Neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.2">Grendel going, God’s anger bare he.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.3">The monster intended some one of earthmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.4">In the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:</div>
<span class="sidenote">He goes towards
the joyous building.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.5">He went under welkin where well he knew of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.6">The wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.7">Gold-hall of earthmen. Not the earliest occasion</div>
<span class="sidenote">This was not his
first visit there.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.8">He the home and manor of Hrothgar had sought:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.9">Ne’er found he in life-days later nor earlier</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.10">Hardier hero, hall-thanes<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XII.FNDEF.1" id="XII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> more sturdy!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.11">Then came to the building the warrior marching,</div>
<span class="sidenote">His horrid fingers
tear the door open.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.12">Bereft of his joyance. The door quickly opened</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.13">On fire-hinges fastened, when his fingers had touched it;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.14">The fell one had flung then—his fury so bitter—</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.15">Open the entrance. Early thereafter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.16">The foeman trod the shining hall-pavement,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He strides furiously
into the hall.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.17">Strode he angrily; from the eyes of him glimmered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.18">A lustre unlovely likest to fire.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.19">He beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.20">A circle of kinsmen sleeping together,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He exults over his
supposed prey.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.21">A throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.22">He minded to sunder from each of the thanemen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.23">The life from his body, horrible demon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.24">Ere morning came, since fate had allowed him</div>
<span class="sidenote">Fate has decreed
that he shall devour
no more heroes.
Beowulf suffers
from suspense.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.25">The prospect of plenty. Providence willed not</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.26">To permit him any more of men under heaven</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.27">To eat in the night-time. Higelac’s kinsman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.28">Great sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_27">[27]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.29">In unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.30">No thought had the monster of deferring the matter,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel immediately
seizes a
sleeping warrior,
and devours him.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.31">But on earliest occasion he quickly laid hold of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.32">A soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.33">Bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.34">Swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man’s</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.35">Feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.36">Nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warrior</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf and Grendel
grapple.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.37">Snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.38">Forward the foeman foined with his hand;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.39">Caught he quickly the cunning deviser,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.40">On his elbow he rested. This early discovered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.41">The master of malice, that in middle-earth’s regions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.42">’Neath the whole of the heavens, no hand-grapple greater</div>
<span class="sidenote">The monster is
amazed at Beowulf’s
strength.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.43">In any man else had he ever encountered:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.44">Fearful in spirit, faint-mooded waxed he,</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.45">Not off could betake him; death he was pondering,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He is anxious to
flee.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.46">Would fly to his covert, seek the devils’ assembly:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.47">His calling no more was the same he had followed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.48">Long in his lifetime. The liege-kinsman worthy</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf recalls his
boast of the evening,
and determines
to fulfil it.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.49">Of Higelac minded his speech of the evening,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.50">Stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.51">His fingers crackled; the giant was outward,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.52">The earl stepped farther. The famous one minded</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.53">To flee away farther, if he found an occasion,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.54">And off and away, avoiding delay,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.55">To fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.56">The strength of his grapple in the grip of the foeman.</div>
<span class="sidenote">’Twas a luckless
day for Grendel.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.57">’Twas an ill-taken journey that the injury-bringing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.58">Harrying harmer to Heorot wandered:</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hall groans.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.59">The palace re-echoed; to all of the Danemen,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.60">Dwellers in castles, to each of the bold ones,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.61">Earlmen, was terror. Angry they both were,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.62">Archwarders raging.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XII.FNDEF.2" id="XII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> Rattled the building;</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_28">[28]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.63">’Twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.64">The bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.65">Excellent earth-hall; but within and without it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.66">Was fastened so firmly in fetters of iron,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.67">By the art of the armorer. Off from the sill there</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.68">Bent mead-benches many, as men have informed me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.69">Adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle.</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.70">The Scylding wise men weened ne’er before</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.71">That by might and main-strength a man under heaven</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.72">Might break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.73">Crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fire</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.74">In smoke should consume it. The sound mounted upward</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s cries terrify
the Danes.</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.75">Novel enough; on the North Danes fastened</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.76">A terror of anguish, on all of the men there</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.77">Who heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.78">The song of defeat from the foeman of heaven,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.79">Heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow</div>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.80">Hell-bound bewailing. He held him too firmly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XII.81">Who was strongest of main-strength of men of that era.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. and t.B. emend so as to make lines 9 and 10 read: <i>Never in his life,
earlier or later, had he, the hell-thane, found a braver hero</i>.—They argue
that Beowulf’s companions had done nothing to merit such encomiums as the
usual readings allow them.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">réðe rén-weardas</span>’ (771), t.B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">réðe, rénhearde</span>.’ Translate:
<i>They were both angry, raging and mighty</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XIII">
</section></body></html>