<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXI">XXI.</a>HROTHGAR’S ACCOUNT OF THE MONSTERS.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar laments
the death of Æschere,
his shoulder-companion.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.1">Hrothgar rejoined, helm of the Scyldings:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.2">“Ask not of joyance! Grief is renewed to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.3">The folk of the Danemen. Dead is Æschere,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.4">Yrmenlaf’s brother, older than he,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.5">My true-hearted counsellor, trusty adviser,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.6">Shoulder-companion, when fighting in battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.7">Our heads we protected, when troopers were clashing,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He was my ideal
hero.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.8">And heroes were dashing; such an earl should be ever,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.9">An erst-worthy atheling, as Æschere proved him.</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.10">The flickering death-spirit became in Heorot</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.11">His hand-to-hand murderer; I can not tell whither</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.12">The cruel one turned in the carcass exulting,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_47">[47]</span>
<span class="sidenote">This horrible
creature came to
avenge Grendel’s
death.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.13">By cramming discovered.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.1" id="XXI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> The quarrel she wreaked then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.14">That last night igone Grendel thou killedst</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.15">In grewsomest manner, with grim-holding clutches,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.16">Since too long he had lessened my liege-troop and wasted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.17">My folk-men so foully. He fell in the battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.18">With forfeit of life, and another has followed,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.19">A mighty crime-worker, her kinsman avenging,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.20">And henceforth hath ‘stablished her hatred unyielding,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.2" id="XXI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.21">As it well may appear to many a liegeman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.22">Who mourneth in spirit the treasure-bestower,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.23">Her heavy heart-sorrow; the hand is now lifeless</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.24">Which<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.3" id="XXI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> availed you in every wish that you cherished.</div>
<span class="sidenote">I have heard my
vassals speak of
these two uncanny
monsters who lived
in the moors.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.25">Land-people heard I, liegemen, this saying,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.26">Dwellers in halls, they had seen very often</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.27">A pair of such mighty march-striding creatures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.28">Far-dwelling spirits, holding the moorlands:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.29">One of them wore, as well they might notice,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.30">The image of woman, the other one wretched</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.31">In guise of a man wandered in exile,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.32">Except he was huger than any of earthmen;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.33">Earth-dwelling people entitled him Grendel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.34">In days of yore: they know not their father,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.35">Whe’r ill-going spirits any were borne him</div>
<span class="sidenote">The inhabit the
most desolate and
horrible places.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.36">Ever before. They guard the wolf-coverts,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.37">Lands inaccessible, wind-beaten nesses,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.38">Fearfullest fen-deeps, where a flood from the mountains</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.39">’Neath mists of the nesses netherward rattles,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.40">The stream under earth: not far is it henceward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.41">Measured by mile-lengths that the mere-water standeth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.42">Which forests hang over, with frost-whiting covered,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXI.FNDEF.4" id="XXI.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_48">[48]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.43">A firm-rooted forest, the floods overshadow.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.44">There ever at night one an ill-meaning portent</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.45">A fire-flood may see; ’mong children of men</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.46">None liveth so wise that wot of the bottom;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.47">Though harassed by hounds the heath-stepper seek for,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Even the hounded
deer will not seek
refuge in these uncanny
regions.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.48">Fly to the forest, firm-antlered he-deer,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.49">Spurred from afar, his spirit he yieldeth,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.50">His life on the shore, ere in he will venture</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.51">To cover his head. Uncanny the place is:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.52">Thence upward ascendeth the surging of waters,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.53">Wan to the welkin, when the wind is stirring</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.54">The weathers unpleasing, till the air groweth gloomy,</div>
<span class="sidenote">To thee only can I
look for assistance.</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.55">And the heavens lower. Now is help to be gotten</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.56">From thee and thee only! The abode thou know’st not,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.57">The dangerous place where thou’rt able to meet with</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.58">The sin-laden hero: seek if thou darest!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.59">For the feud I will fully fee thee with money,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.60">With old-time treasure, as erstwhile I did thee,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXI.61">With well-twisted jewels, if away thou shalt get thee.”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrægnod</span>’ (1334), K. and t.B. suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefægnod</span>,’ rendering
‘<i>rejoicing in her fill</i>.’ This gives a parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">æse wlanc</span>’ (1333).
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The line ‘And … yielding,’ B. renders: <i>And she has performed a deed
of blood-vengeance whose effect is far-reaching</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sé Þe</span>’ (1345) is an instance of masc. rel. with fem. antecedent. So
v. 1888, where ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sé Þe</span>’ refers to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">yldo</span>.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXI.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXI.FNREF.4">[4]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hrímge</span>’ in the H.-So. edition, Gr. and others read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hrínde</span>’
(=<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hrínende</span>), and translate: <i>which rustling forests overhang</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXII">
</section></body></html>