<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.VI">VI.</a>BEOWULF INTRODUCES HIMSELF AT THE PALACE.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.1">The highway glistened with many-hued pebble,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.2">A by-path led the liegemen together.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.3"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VI.FNDEF.1" id="VI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup>Firm and hand-locked the war-burnie glistened,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.4">The ring-sword radiant rang ’mid the armor</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.5">As the party was approaching the palace together</div>
<span class="sidenote">They set their
arms and armor
against the wall.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.6">In warlike equipments. ’Gainst the wall of the building</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.7">Their wide-fashioned war-shields they weary did set then,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_13">[13]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.8">Battle-shields sturdy; benchward they turned then;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.9">Their battle-sarks rattled, the gear of the heroes;</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.10">The lances stood up then, all in a cluster,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.11">The arms of the seamen, ashen-shafts mounted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.12">With edges of iron: the armor-clad troopers</div>
<span class="sidenote">A Danish hero
asks them whence
and why they are
come.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.13">Were decked with weapons. Then a proud-mooded hero</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.14">Asked of the champions questions of lineage:</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.15">“From what borders bear ye your battle-shields plated,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.16">Gilded and gleaming, your gray-colored burnies,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.17">Helmets with visors and heap of war-lances?—</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.18">To Hrothgar the king I am servant and liegeman.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.19">’Mong folk from far-lands found I have never</div>
<span class="sidenote">He expresses no
little admiration
for the strangers.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.20">Men so many of mien more courageous.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.21">I ween that from valor, nowise as outlaws,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.22">But from greatness of soul ye sought for King Hrothgar.”</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf replies.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.23">Then the strength-famous earlman answer rendered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.24">The proud-mooded Wederchief replied to his question,</div>
<span class="sidenote">We are Higelac’s
table-companions,
and bear an important
commission to
your prince.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.25">Hardy ’neath helmet: “Higelac’s mates are we;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.26">Beowulf hight I. To the bairn of Healfdene,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.27">The famous folk-leader, I freely will tell</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.28">To thy prince my commission, if pleasantly hearing</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.29">He’ll grant we may greet him so gracious to all men.”</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.30">Wulfgar replied then (he was prince of the Wendels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.31">His boldness of spirit was known unto many,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.32">His prowess and prudence): “The prince of the Scyldings,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Wulfgar, the
thane, says that
he will go and ask
Hrothgar whether
he will see the
strangers.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.33">The friend-lord of Danemen, I will ask of thy journey,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.34">The giver of rings, as thou urgest me do it,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.35">The folk-chief famous, and inform thee early</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.36">What answer the good one mindeth to render me.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.37">He turned then hurriedly where Hrothgar was sitting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.38"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VI.FNDEF.2" id="VI.FNREF.2" title="Gr. and others translate ‘unhár’ by ‘bald’; old and bald.">2</a></sup>Old and hoary, his earlmen attending him;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.39">The strength-famous went till he stood at the shoulder</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.40">Of the lord of the Danemen, of courteous thanemen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.41">The custom he minded. Wulfgar addressed then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.42">His friendly liegelord: “Folk of the Geatmen</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_14">[14]</span>
<span class="sidenote">He thereupon
urges his liegelord
to receive the visitors
courteously.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.43">O’er the way of the waters are wafted hither,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.44">Faring from far-lands: the foremost in rank</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.45">The battle-champions Beowulf title.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.46">They make this petition: with thee, O my chieftain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.47">To be granted a conference; O gracious King Hrothgar,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.48">Friendly answer refuse not to give them!</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar, too, is
struck with Beowulf’s
appearance.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.49">In war-trappings weeded worthy they seem</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.50">Of earls to be honored; sure the atheling is doughty</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VI.51">Who headed the heroes hitherward coming.”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="VI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#VI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Instead of the punctuation given by H.-So, S. proposed to insert a comma
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">scír</span>’ (322), and to take ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hring-íren</span>’ as meaning ‘ring-mail’ and as
parallel with ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúð-byrne</span>.’ The passage would then read: <i>The firm and
hand-locked war-burnie shone, bright ring-mail, rang ’mid the armor, etc</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#VI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Gr. and others translate ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unhár</span>’ by ‘bald’; <i>old and bald</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="VII">
</section></body></html>