<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 39</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-39" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXIX">XXXIX.</a>THE DEAD FOES.—WIGLAF’S BITTER TAUNTS.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf is sorely
grieved to see his
lord look so un-warlike.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.1">It had wofully chanced then the youthful retainer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.2">To behold on earth the most ardent-belovèd</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.3">At his life-days’ limit, lying there helpless.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.4">The slayer too lay there, of life all bereavèd,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.5">Horrible earth-drake, harassed with sorrow:</div>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon has
plundered his last
hoard.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.6">The round-twisted monster was permitted no longer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.7">To govern the ring-hoards, but edges of war-swords</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.8">Mightily seized him, battle-sharp, sturdy</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.9">Leavings of hammers, that still from his wounds</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.10">The flier-from-farland fell to the earth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.11">Hard by his hoard-house, hopped he at midnight</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.12">Not e’er through the air, nor exulting in jewels</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.13">Suffered them to see him: but he sank then to earthward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.14">Through the hero-chief’s handwork. I heard sure it throve then</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_96">[96]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Few warriors
dared to face the
monster.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.15">But few in the land of liegemen of valor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.16">Though of every achievement bold he had proved him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.17">To run ’gainst the breath of the venomous scather,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.18">Or the hall of the treasure to trouble with hand-blows,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.19">If he watching had found the ward of the hoard-hall</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.20">On the barrow abiding. Beowulf’s part of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.21">The treasure of jewels was paid for with death;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.22">Each of the twain had attained to the end of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.23">Life so unlasting. Not long was the time till</div>
<span class="sidenote">The cowardly
thanes come out
of the thicket.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.24">The tardy-at-battle returned from the thicket,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.25">The timid truce-breakers ten all together,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.26">Who durst not before play with the lances</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.27">In the prince of the people’s pressing emergency;</div>
<span class="sidenote">They are ashamed
of their desertion.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.28">But blushing with shame, with shields they betook them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.29">With arms and armor where the old one was lying:</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.30">They gazed upon Wiglaf. He was sitting exhausted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.31">Foot-going fighter, not far from the shoulders</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.32">Of the lord of the people, would rouse him with water;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.33">No whit did it help him; though he hoped for it keenly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.34">He was able on earth not at all in the leader</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.35">Life to retain, and nowise to alter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.36">The will of the Wielder; the World-Ruler’s power<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIX.FNDEF.1" id="XXXIX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.37">Would govern the actions of each one of heroes,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf is ready to
excoriate them.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.38">As yet He is doing. From the young one forthwith then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.39">Could grim-worded greeting be got for him quickly</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.40">Whose courage had failed him. Wiglaf discoursed then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.41">Weohstan his son, sad-mooded hero,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He begins to taunt
them.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.42">Looked on the hated: “He who soothness will utter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.43">Can say that the liegelord who gave you the jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.44">The ornament-armor wherein ye are standing,</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.45">When on ale-bench often he offered to hall-men</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.46">Helmet and burnie, the prince to his liegemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.47">As best upon earth he was able to find him,—</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_97">[97]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Surely our lord
wasted his armor
on poltroons.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.48">That he wildly wasted his war-gear undoubtedly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.49">When battle o’ertook him.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIX.FNDEF.2" id="XXXIX.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> The troop-king no need had</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.50">To glory in comrades; yet God permitted him,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He, however, got
along without you</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.51">Victory-Wielder, with weapon unaided</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.52">Himself to avenge, when vigor was needed.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.53">I life-protection but little was able</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.54">To give him in battle, and I ’gan, notwithstanding,</div>
<span class="sidenote">With some aid, I
could have saved
our liegelord</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.55">Helping my kinsman (my strength overtaxing):</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.56">He waxed the weaker when with weapon I smote on</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.57">My mortal opponent, the fire less strongly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.58">Flamed from his bosom. Too few of protectors</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.59">Came round the king at the critical moment.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Gift-giving is over
with your people:
the ring-lord is
dead.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.60">Now must ornament-taking and weapon-bestowing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.61">Home-joyance all, cease for your kindred,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.62">Food for the people; each of your warriors</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.63">Must needs be bereavèd of rights that he holdeth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.64">In landed possessions, when faraway nobles</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.65">Shall learn of your leaving your lord so basely,</div>
<span class="sidenote">What is life without
honor?</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.66">The dastardly deed. Death is more pleasant</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIX.67">To every earlman than infamous life is!”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXIX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">dædum rædan</span>’ (2859) B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déað árædan</span>,’ and renders: <i>The
might (or judgment) of God would determine death for every man, as he still
does.</i>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXIX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Some critics, H. himself in earlier editions, put the clause, ‘When …
him’ (A.-S. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þá … beget</span>’) with the following sentence; that is, they make it
dependent upon ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þorfte</span>’ (2875) instead of upon ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">forwurpe</span>’ (2873).
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XL">
</section></body></html>