<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 26</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXVI">XXVI.</a>HROTHGAR MORALIZES.—REST AFTER LABOR.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">A wounded spirit.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.1">“Then bruised in his bosom he with bitter-toothed missile</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.2">Is hurt ’neath his helmet: from harmful pollution</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.3">He is powerless to shield him by the wonderful mandates</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.4">Of the loath-cursèd spirit; what too long he hath holden</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.5">Him seemeth too small, savage he hoardeth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.6">Nor boastfully giveth gold-plated rings,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVI.FNDEF.1" id="XXVI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.7">The fate of the future flouts and forgetteth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.8">Since God had erst given him greatness no little,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.9">Wielder of Glory. His end-day anear,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.10">It afterward happens that the bodily-dwelling</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.11">Fleetingly fadeth, falls into ruins;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.12">Another lays hold who doleth the ornaments,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.13">The nobleman’s jewels, nothing lamenting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.14">Heedeth no terror. Oh, Beowulf dear,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.15">Best of the heroes, from bale-strife defend thee,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.16">And choose thee the better, counsels eternal;</div>
<span class="sidenote">Be not over proud:
life is fleeting, and
its strength soon
wasteth away.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.17">Beware of arrogance, world-famous champion!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.18">But a little-while lasts thy life-vigor’s fulness;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.19">’Twill after hap early, that illness or sword-edge</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.20">Shall part thee from strength, or the grasp of the fire,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.21">Or the wave of the current, or clutch of the edges,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.22">Or flight of the war-spear, or age with its horrors,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.23">Or thine eyes’ bright flashing shall fade into darkness:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.24">’Twill happen full early, excellent hero,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar gives an
account of his
reign.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.25">That death shall subdue thee. So the Danes a half-century</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.26">I held under heaven, helped them in struggles</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.27">’Gainst many a race in middle-earth’s regions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.28">With ash-wood and edges, that enemies none</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.29">On earth molested me. Lo! offsetting change, now,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_61">[61]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Sorrow after joy.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.30">Came to my manor, grief after joyance,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.31">When Grendel became my constant visitor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.32">Inveterate hater: I from that malice</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.33">Continually travailed with trouble no little.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.34">Thanks be to God that I gained in my lifetime,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.35">To the Lord everlasting, to look on the gory</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.36">Head with mine eyes, after long-lasting sorrow!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.37">Go to the bench now, battle-adornèd</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.38">Joy in the feasting: of jewels in common</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.39">We’ll meet with many when morning appeareth.”</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.40">The Geatman was gladsome, ganged he immediately</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.41">To go to the bench, as the clever one bade him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.42">Then again as before were the famous-for-prowess,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.43">Hall-inhabiters, handsomely banqueted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.44">Feasted anew. The night-veil fell then</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.45">Dark o’er the warriors. The courtiers rose then;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.46">The gray-haired was anxious to go to his slumbers,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.47">The hoary old Scylding. Hankered the Geatman,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is fagged,
and seeks rest.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.48">The champion doughty, greatly, to rest him:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.49">An earlman early outward did lead him,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.50">Fagged from his faring, from far-country springing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.51">Who for etiquette’s sake all of a liegeman’s</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.52">Needs regarded, such as seamen at that time</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.53">Were bounden to feel. The big-hearted rested;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.54">The building uptowered, spacious and gilded,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.55">The guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad raven</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.56">Blithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.57">Then the bright-shining sun o’er the bottoms came going;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVI.FNDEF.2" id="XXVI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.58">The warriors hastened, the heads of the peoples</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.59">Were ready to go again to their peoples,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The Geats prepare
to leave Dane-land.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.60">The high-mooded farer would faraway thenceward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.61">Look for his vessel. The valiant one bade then,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVI.FNDEF.3" id="XXVI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_62">[62]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Unferth asks Beowulf
to accept his
sword as a gift.
Beowulf thanks
him.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.62">Offspring of Ecglaf, off to bear Hrunting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.63">To take his weapon, his well-beloved iron;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.64">He him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.65">The war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.66">The blade of the brand: ’twas a brave-mooded hero.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.67">When the warriors were ready, arrayed in their trappings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.68">The atheling dear to the Danemen advanced then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.69">On to the dais, where the other was sitting,</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVI.70">Grim-mooded hero, greeted King Hrothgar.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXVI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXVI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> K. says ‘<i>proudly giveth</i>.’—Gr. says, ‘<i>And gives no gold-plated rings, in
order to incite the recipient to boastfulness</i>.’—B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gyld</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gylp</span>,’
and renders: <i>And gives no beaten rings for reward</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXVI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> If S.’s emendation be accepted, v. 57 will read: <i>Then came the light,
going bright after darkness: the warriors, etc</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXVI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> As the passage stands in H.-So., Unferth presents Beowulf with the sword
Hrunting, and B. thanks him for the gift. If, however, the suggestions of Grdtvg.
and M. be accepted, the passage will read: <i>Then the brave one (</i>i.e.<i> Beowulf)
commanded that Hrunting be borne to the son of Ecglaf (Unferth), bade him
take his sword, his dear weapon; he (B.) thanked him (U.) for the loan, etc</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXVII">
</section></body></html>