<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 27</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXVII">XXVII.</a>SORROW AT PARTING.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s farewell.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.1">Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s offspring:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.2">“We men of the water wish to declare now</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.3">Fared from far-lands, we’re firmly determined</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.4">To seek King Higelac. Here have we fitly</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.5">Been welcomed and feasted, as heart would desire it;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.6">Good was the greeting. If greater affection</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.7">I am anywise able ever on earth to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.8">Gain at thy hands, ruler of heroes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.9">Than yet I have done, I shall quickly be ready</div>
<span class="sidenote">I shall be ever
ready to aid thee.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.10">For combat and conflict. O’er the course of the waters</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.11">Learn I that neighbors alarm thee with terror,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.12">As haters did whilom, I hither will bring thee</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.13">For help unto heroes henchmen by thousands.</div>
<span class="sidenote">My liegelord will
encourage me in
aiding thee.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.14">I know as to Higelac, the lord of the Geatmen,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.15">Though young in years, he yet will permit me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.16">By words and by works, ward of the people,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.17">Fully to furnish thee forces and bear thee</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.18">My lance to relieve thee, if liegemen shall fail thee,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.19">And help of my hand-strength; if Hrethric be treating,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_63">[63]</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.20">Bairn of the king, at the court of the Geatmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.21">He thereat may find him friends in abundance:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.22">Faraway countries he were better to seek for</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.23">Who trusts in himself.” Hrothgar discoursed then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.24">Making rejoinder: “These words thou hast uttered</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.25">All-knowing God hath given thy spirit!</div>
<span class="sidenote">O Beowulf, thou
art wise beyond
thy years.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.26">Ne’er heard I an earlman thus early in life</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.27">More clever in speaking: thou’rt cautious of spirit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.28">Mighty of muscle, in mouth-answers prudent.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.29">I count on the hope that, happen it ever</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.30">That missile shall rob thee of Hrethel’s descendant,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.31">Edge-horrid battle, and illness or weapon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.32">Deprive thee of prince, of people’s protector,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Should Higelac
die, the Geats
could find no better
successor than
thou wouldst make.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.33">And life thou yet holdest, the Sea-Geats will never</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.34">Find a more fitting folk-lord to choose them,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.35">Gem-ward of heroes, than <i>thou</i> mightest prove thee,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.36">If the kingdom of kinsmen thou carest to govern.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.37">Thy mood-spirit likes me the longer the better,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.38">Beowulf dear: thou hast brought it to pass that</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.39">To both these peoples peace shall be common,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Thou hast healed
the ancient breach
between our races.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.40">To Geat-folk and Danemen, the strife be suspended,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.41">The secret assailings they suffered in yore-days;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.42">And also that jewels be shared while I govern</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.43">The wide-stretching kingdom, and that many shall visit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.44">Others o’er the ocean with excellent gift-gems:</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.45">The ring-adorned bark shall bring o’er the currents</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.46">Presents and love-gifts. This people I know</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.47">Tow’rd foeman and friend firmly established,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVII.FNDEF.1" id="XXVII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.48">After ancient etiquette everywise blameless.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.49">Then the warden of earlmen gave him still farther,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Parting gifts</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.50">Kinsman of Healfdene, a dozen of jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.51">Bade him safely seek with the presents</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.52">His well-beloved people, early returning.</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_64">[64]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar kisses
Beowulf, and
weeps.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.53">Then the noble-born king kissed the distinguished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.54">Dear-lovèd liegeman, the Dane-prince saluted him,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.55">And claspèd his neck; tears from him fell,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.56">From the gray-headed man: he two things expected,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.57">Agèd and reverend, but rather the second,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.58"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVII.FNDEF.2" id="XXVII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>That bold in council they’d meet thereafter.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.59">The man was so dear that he failed to suppress the</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.60">Emotions that moved him, but in mood-fetters fastened</div>
<span class="sidenote">The old king is
deeply grieved to
part with his benefactor.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.61">The long-famous hero longeth in secret</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.62">Deep in his spirit for the dear-beloved man</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.63">Though not a blood-kinsman. Beowulf thenceward,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.64">Gold-splendid warrior, walked o’er the meadows</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.65">Exulting in treasure: the sea-going vessel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.66">Riding at anchor awaited its owner.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.67">As they pressed on their way then, the present of Hrothgar</div>
<span class="sidenote">Giving liberally is
the true proof of
kingship.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.68">Was frequently referred to: a folk-king indeed that</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.69">Everyway blameless, till age did debar him</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVII.70">The joys of his might, which hath many oft injured.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXVII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXVII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">geworhte</span>,’ the crux of this passage, B. proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">geþóhte</span>,’ rendering:
<i>I know this people with firm thought every way blameless towards foe and
friends</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXVII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> S. and B. emend so as to negative the verb ‘meet.’ “Why should
Hrothgar weep if he expects to meet Beowulf again?” both these scholars
ask. But the weeping is mentioned before the ‘expectations’: the tears may
have been due to many emotions, especially gratitude, struggling for expression.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXVIII">
</section></body></html>