<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.IX">IX.</a>UNFERTH TAUNTS BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Unferth, a thane
of Hrothgar, is
jealous of Beowulf,
and undertakes to
twit him.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.1">Unferth spoke up, Ecglaf his son,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.2">Who sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.3">Opened the jousting (the journey<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IX.FNDEF.1" id="IX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> of Beowulf,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.4">Sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to Unferth</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.5">And greatest chagrin, too, for granted he never</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.6">That any man else on earth should attain to,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.7">Gain under heaven, more glory than he):</div>
<span class="sidenote">Did you take part
in a swimming-match
with Breca?</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.8">“Art thou that Beowulf with Breca did struggle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.9">On the wide sea-currents at swimming contended,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.10">Where to humor your pride the ocean ye tried,</div>
<span class="sidenote">’Twas mere folly
that actuated you
both to risk your
lives on the ocean.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.11">From vainest vaunting adventured your bodies</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.12">In care of the waters? And no one was able</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.13">Nor lief nor loth one, in the least to dissuade you</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.14">Your difficult voyage; then ye ventured a-swimming,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.15">Where your arms outstretching the streams ye did cover,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.16">The mere-ways measured, mixing and stirring them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.17">Glided the ocean; angry the waves were,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.18">With the weltering of winter. In the water’s possession,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.19">Ye toiled for a seven-night; he at swimming outdid thee,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.20">In strength excelled thee. Then early at morning</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.21">On the Heathoremes’ shore the holm-currents tossed him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.22">Sought he thenceward the home of his fathers,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.23">Beloved of his liegemen, the land of the Brondings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.24">The peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_20">[20]</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.25">Had borough and jewels. The pledge that he made thee</div>
<span class="sidenote">Breca outdid you
entirely.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.26">The son of Beanstan hath soothly accomplished.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.27">Then I ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Much more will
Grendel outdo you,
if you vie with him
in prowess.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.28">Though ever triumphant in onset of battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.29">A grim grappling, if Grendel thou darest</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.30">For the space of a night near-by to wait for!”</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf retaliates.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.31">Beowulf answered, offspring of Ecgtheow:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.32">“My good friend Unferth, sure freely and wildly,</div>
<span class="sidenote">O friend Unferth,
you are fuddled
with beer, and cannot
talk coherently.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.33">Thou fuddled with beer of Breca hast spoken,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.34">Hast told of his journey! A fact I allege it,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.35">That greater strength in the waters I had then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.36">Ills in the ocean, than any man else had.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.37">We made agreement as the merest of striplings</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.38">Promised each other (both of us then were</div>
<span class="sidenote">We simply kept an
engagement made
in early life.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.39">Younkers in years) that we yet would adventure</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.40">Out on the ocean; it all we accomplished.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.41">While swimming the sea-floods, sword-blade unscabbarded</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.42">Boldly we brandished, our bodies expected</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.43">To shield from the sharks. He sure was unable</div>
<span class="sidenote">He <i>could</i> not excel
me, and I <i>would</i>
not excel him.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.44">To swim on the waters further than I could,</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.45">More swift on the waves, nor <i>would</i> I from him go.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.46">Then we two companions stayed in the ocean</div>
<span class="sidenote">After five days the
currents separated
us.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.47">Five nights together, till the currents did part us,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.48">The weltering waters, weathers the bleakest,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.49">And nethermost night, and the north-wind whistled</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.50">Fierce in our faces; fell were the billows.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.51">The mere fishes’ mood was mightily ruffled:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.52">And there against foemen my firm-knotted corslet,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.53">Hand-jointed, hardy, help did afford me;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.54">My battle-sark braided, brilliantly gilded,</div>
<span class="sidenote">A horrible sea-beast
attacked me,
but I slew him.</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.55">Lay on my bosom. To the bottom then dragged me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.56">A hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.57">Grim in his grapple: ’twas granted me, nathless,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.58">To pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.59">My obedient blade; battle offcarried</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IX.60">The mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="IX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#IX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> It has been plausibly suggested that ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">síð</span>’ (in 501 and in 353) means
‘arrival.’ If so, translate the bracket: <i>(the arrival of Beowulf, the brave
seafarer, was a source of great chagrin to Unferth, etc.)</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="X">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_21">[21]</span>
</section></body></html>