<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XIX">XIX.</a>BEOWULF RECEIVES FURTHER HONOR.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">More gifts are offered
Beowulf.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.1">A beaker was borne him, and bidding to quaff it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.2">Graciously given, and gold that was twisted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.3">Pleasantly proffered, a pair of arm-jewels,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_42">[42]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.4">Rings and corslet, of collars the greatest</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.5">I’ve heard of ’neath heaven. Of heroes not any</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.6">More splendid from jewels have I heard ’neath the welkin,</div>
<span class="sidenote">A famous necklace
is referred to, in
comparison with
the gems presented
to Beowulf.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.7">Since Hama off bore the Brosingmen’s necklace,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.8">The bracteates and jewels, from the bright-shining city,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.1" id="XIX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.9">Eormenric’s cunning craftiness fled from,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.10">Chose gain everlasting. Geatish Higelac,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.11">Grandson of Swerting, last had this jewel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.12">When tramping ’neath banner the treasure he guarded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.13">The field-spoil defended; Fate offcarried him</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.14">When for deeds of daring he endured tribulation,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.15">Hate from the Frisians; the ornaments bare he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.16">O’er the cup of the currents, costly gem-treasures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.17">Mighty folk-leader, he fell ’neath his target;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.18">The<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.2" id="XIX.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> corpse of the king then came into charge of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.19">The race of the Frankmen, the mail-shirt and collar:</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.20">Warmen less noble plundered the fallen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.21">When the fight was finished; the folk of the Geatmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.22">The field of the dead held in possession.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.23">The choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.24">Wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she:</div>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Wealhtheow
magnifies
Beowulf’s achievements.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.25">“This collar enjoy thou, Beowulf worthy,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.26">Young man, in safety, and use thou this armor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.27">Gems of the people, and prosper thou fully,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.28">Show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.29">Mild with instruction! I’ll mind thy requital.</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.30">Thou hast brought it to pass that far and near</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.31">Forever and ever earthmen shall honor thee,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.32">Even so widely as ocean surroundeth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.33">The blustering bluffs. Be, while thou livest,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_43">[43]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.34">A wealth-blessèd atheling. I wish thee most truly</div>
<span class="sidenote">May gifts never
fail thee.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.35">Jewels and treasure. Be kind to my son, thou</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.36">Living in joyance! Here each of the nobles</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.37">Is true unto other, gentle in spirit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.38">Loyal to leader. The liegemen are peaceful,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.39">The war-troops ready: well-drunken heroes,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.3" id="XIX.FNREF.3" title="S. suggests ‘wine-joyous heroes,’ ‘warriors elated with wine.’">3</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.40">Do as I bid ye.” Then she went to the settle.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.41">There was choicest of banquets, wine drank the heroes:</div>
<span class="sidenote">They little know
of the sorrow in
store for them.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.42">Weird they knew not, destiny cruel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.43">As to many an earlman early it happened,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.44">When evening had come and Hrothgar had parted</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.45">Off to his manor, the mighty to slumber.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.46">Warriors unnumbered warded the building</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.47">As erst they did often: the ale-settle bared they,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.48">’Twas covered all over with beds and pillows.</div>
<span class="sidenote">A doomed thane is
there with them.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.49">Doomed unto death, down to his slumber</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.50">Bowed then a beer-thane. Their battle-shields placed they,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.51">Bright-shining targets, up by their heads then;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.52">O’er the atheling on ale-bench ’twas easy to see there</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.53">Battle-high helmet, burnie of ring-mail,</div>
<span class="sidenote">They were always
ready for battle.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.54">And mighty war-spear. ’Twas the wont of that people</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.55">To constantly keep them equipped for the battle,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIX.FNDEF.4" id="XIX.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.56">At home or marching—in either condition—</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.57">At seasons just such as necessity ordered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIX.58">As best for their ruler; that people was worthy.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> C. suggests a semicolon after ‘city,’ with ‘he’ as supplied subject of
‘fled’ and ‘chose.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feorh</span>’ S. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feoh</span>’: ‘corpse’ in the translation would then
be changed to ‘<i>possessions</i>,’ ‘<i>belongings</i>.’ This is a better reading than one
joining, in such intimate syntactical relations, things so unlike as ‘corpse’ and
‘jewels.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.3">[3]</a> S. suggests ‘<i>wine-joyous heroes</i>,’ ‘<i>warriors elated with wine</i>.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XIX.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XIX.FNREF.4">[4]</a> I believe this translation brings out the meaning of the poet, without
departing seriously from the H.-So. text. ‘Oft’ frequently means ‘constantly,’
‘continually,’ not always ‘often.’—Why ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">an (on) wíg gearwe</span>’ should be
written ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ánwíg-gearwe</span>’ (= ready for single combat), I cannot see. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Gearwe</span>’
occurs quite frequently with ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on</span>’; cf. B. 1110 (<i>ready for the pyre</i>), El. 222
(<i>ready for the glad journey</i>). Moreover, what has the idea of single combat
to do with B. 1247 ff.? The poet is giving an inventory of the arms and
armor which they lay aside on retiring, and he closes his narration by saying
that they were <i>always prepared for battle both at home and on the march</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XX">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_44">[44]</span>
</section></body></html>