<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
<span>XXV.</span>
<span>BEOWULF BRINGS HIS TROPHIES.—HROTHGAR’S GRATITUDE.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.1">Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.2">“Lo! we blithely have brought thee, bairn of Healfdene,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.3">Prince of the Scyldings, these presents from ocean</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.4">Which thine eye looketh on, for an emblem of glory.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.5">I came off alive from this, narrowly ’scaping:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.6">In war ’neath the water the work with great pains I</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.7">Performed, and the fight had been finished quite nearly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.8">Had God not defended me. I failed in the battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.9">Aught to accomplish, aided by Hrunting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.10">Though that weapon was worthy, but the Wielder of earth-folk</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.11">Gave me willingly to see on the wall a</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.12">Heavy old hand-sword hanging in splendor</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.13">(He guided most often the lorn and the friendless),</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.14">That I swung as a weapon. The wards of the house then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.15">I killed in the conflict (when occasion was given me).</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.16">Then the battle-sword burned, the brand that was lifted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.17">As the blood-current sprang, hottest of war-sweats;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.18">Seizing the hilt, from my foes I offbore it;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.19">I avenged as I ought to their acts of malignity,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.20">The murder of Danemen. I then make thee this promise,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.21">Thou’lt be able in Heorot careless to slumber</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.22">With thy throng of heroes and the thanes of thy people</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.23">Every and each, of greater and lesser,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.24">And thou needest not fear for them from the selfsame direction</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.25">As thou formerly fearedst, oh, folk-lord of Scyldings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.26">End-day for earlmen.” To the age-hoary man then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.27">The gray-haired chieftain, the gold-fashioned sword-hilt,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.28">Old-work of giants, was thereupon given;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.29">Since the fall of the fiends, it fell to the keeping</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.30">Of the wielder of Danemen, the wonder-smith’s labor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.31">And the bad-mooded being abandoned this world then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.32">Opponent of God, victim of murder,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.33">And also his mother; it went to the keeping</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.34">Of the best of the world-kings, where waters encircle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.35">Who the scot divided in Scylding dominion.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.36">Hrothgar discoursed, the hilt he regarded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.37">The ancient heirloom where an old-time contention’s</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.38">Beginning was graven: the gurgling currents,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.39">The flood slew thereafter the race of the giants,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.40">They had proved themselves daring: that people was loth to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.41">The Lord everlasting, through lash of the billows</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.42">The Father gave them final requital.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.43">So in letters of rune on the clasp of the handle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.44">Gleaming and golden, ’twas graven exactly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.45">Set forth and said, whom that sword had been made for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.46">Finest of irons, who first it was wrought for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.47">Wreathed at its handle and gleaming with serpents.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.48">The wise one then said (silent they all were)</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.49">Son of old Healfdene: “He may say unrefuted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.50">Who performs ’mid the folk-men fairness and truth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.51">(The hoary old ruler remembers the past),</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.52">That better by birth is this bairn of the nobles!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.53">Thy fame is extended through far-away countries,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.54">Good friend Beowulf, o’er all of the races,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.55">Thou holdest all firmly, hero-like strength with</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.56">Prudence of spirit. I’ll prove myself grateful</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.57">As before we agreed on; thou granted for long shalt</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.58">Become a great comfort to kinsmen and comrades,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.59">A help unto heroes. Heremod became not</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.60">Such to the Scyldings, successors of Ecgwela;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.61">He grew not to please them, but grievous destruction,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.62">And diresome death-woes to Danemen attracted;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.63">He slew in anger his table-companions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.64">Trustworthy counsellors, till he turned off lonely</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.65">From world-joys away, wide-famous ruler:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.66">Though high-ruling heaven in hero-strength raised him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.67">In might exalted him, o’er men of all nations</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.68">Made him supreme, yet a murderous spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.69">Grew in his bosom: he gave then no ring-gems</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.70">To the Danes after custom; endured he unjoyful</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.71">Standing the straits from strife that was raging,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.72">Longsome folk-sorrow. Learn then from this,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.73">Lay hold of virtue! Though laden with winters,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.74">I have sung thee these measures. ’Tis a marvel to tell it,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.75">How all-ruling God from greatness of spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.76">Giveth wisdom to children of men,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.77">Manor and earlship: all things He ruleth.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.78">He often permitteth the mood-thought of man of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.79">The illustrious lineage to lean to possessions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.80">Allows him earthly delights at his manor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.81">A high-burg of heroes to hold in his keeping,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.82">Maketh portions of earth-folk hear him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.83">And a wide-reaching kingdom so that, wisdom failing him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.84">He himself is unable to reckon its boundaries;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.85">He liveth in luxury, little debars him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.86">Nor sickness nor age, no treachery-sorrow</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.87">Becloudeth his spirit, conflict nowhere,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.88">No sword-hate, appeareth, but all of the world doth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.89">Wend as he wisheth; the worse he knoweth not,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.90">Till arrant arrogance inward pervading,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.91">Waxeth and springeth, when the warder is sleeping,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.92">The guard of the soul: with sorrows encompassed,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.93">Too sound is his slumber, the slayer is near him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXV.94">Who with bow and arrow aimeth in malice.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>