<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXVIII">XXVIII.</a>THE HOMEWARD JOURNEY.—THE TWO QUEENS. </h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.1">Then the band of very valiant retainers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.2">Came to the current; they were clad all in armor,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The coast-guard
again.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.3">In link-woven burnies. The land-warder noticed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.4">The return of the earlmen, as he erstwhile had seen them;</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.5">Nowise with insult he greeted the strangers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.6">From the naze of the cliff, but rode on to meet them;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.7">Said the bright-armored visitors<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXVIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> vesselward traveled</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_65">[65]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.8">Welcome to Weders. The wide-bosomed craft then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.9">Lay on the sand, laden with armor,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.10">With horses and jewels, the ring-stemmèd sailer:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.11">The mast uptowered o’er the treasure of Hrothgar.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf gives the
guard a handsome
sword.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.12">To the boat-ward a gold-bound brand he presented,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.13">That he was afterwards honored on the ale-bench more highly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.14">As the heirloom’s owner. <sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXVIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>Set he out on his vessel,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.15">To drive on the deep, Dane-country left he.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.16">Along by the mast then a sea-garment fluttered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.17">A rope-fastened sail. The sea-boat resounded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.18">The wind o’er the waters the wave-floater nowise</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.19">Kept from its journey; the sea-goer traveled,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.20">The foamy-necked floated forth o’er the currents,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.21">The well-fashioned vessel o’er the ways of the ocean,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The Geats see
their own land
again.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.22">Till they came within sight of the cliffs of the Geatmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.23">The well-known headlands. The wave-goer hastened</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.24">Driven by breezes, stood on the shore.</div>
<span class="sidenote">The port-warden is
anxiously looking
for them.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.25">Prompt at the ocean, the port-ward was ready,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.26">Who long in the past outlooked in the distance,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.3" id="XXVIII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.27">At water’s-edge waiting well-lovèd heroes;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.28">He bound to the bank then the broad-bosomed vessel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.29">Fast in its fetters, lest the force of the waters</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.30">Should be able to injure the ocean-wood winsome.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.31">Bade he up then take the treasure of princes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.32">Plate-gold and fretwork; not far was it thence</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.33">To go off in search of the giver of jewels:</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_66">[66]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.34">Hrethel’s son Higelac at home there remaineth,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.4" id="XXVIII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.35">Himself with his comrades close to the sea-coast.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.36">The building was splendid, the king heroic,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.37">Great in his hall, Hygd very young was,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hygd, the noble
queen of Higelac,
lavish of gifts.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.38">Fine-mooded, clever, though few were the winters</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.39">That the daughter of Hæreth had dwelt in the borough;</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.40">But she nowise was cringing nor niggard of presents,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.41">Of ornaments rare, to the race of the Geatmen.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Offa’s consort,
Thrytho, is contrasted
with Hygd.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.42">Thrytho nursed anger, excellent<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.5" id="XXVIII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> folk-queen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.43">Hot-burning hatred: no hero whatever</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.44">’Mong household companions, her husband excepted</div>
<span class="sidenote">She is a terror to
all save her husband.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.45">Dared to adventure to look at the woman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.46">With eyes in the daytime;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXVIII.FNDEF.6" id="XXVIII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup> but he knew that death-chains</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.47">Hand-wreathed were wrought him: early thereafter,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.48">When the hand-strife was over, edges were ready,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.49">That fierce-raging sword-point had to force a decision,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.50">Murder-bale show. Such no womanly custom</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.51">For a lady to practise, though lovely her person,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.52">That a weaver-of-peace, on pretence of anger</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.53">A belovèd liegeman of life should deprive.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.54">Soothly this hindered Heming’s kinsman;</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.55">Other ale-drinking earlmen asserted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.56">That fearful folk-sorrows fewer she wrought them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.57">Treacherous doings, since first she was given</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.58">Adorned with gold to the war-hero youthful,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.59">For her origin honored, when Offa’s great palace</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.60">O’er the fallow flood by her father’s instructions</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.61">She sought on her journey, where she afterwards fully,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.62">Famed for her virtue, her fate on the king’s-seat</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_67">[67]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.63">Enjoyed in her lifetime, love did she hold with</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.64">The ruler of heroes, the best, it is told me,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.65">Of all of the earthmen that oceans encompass,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.66">Of earl-kindreds endless; hence Offa was famous</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.67">Far and widely, by gifts and by battles,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.68">Spear-valiant hero; the home of his fathers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.69">He governed with wisdom, whence Eomær did issue</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.70">For help unto heroes, Heming’s kinsman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXVIII.71">Grandson of Garmund, great in encounters.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">scawan</span>’ (1896), ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">scaðan</span>’ has been proposed. Accepting this, we
may render: <i>He said the bright-armored warriors were going to their vessel,
welcome, etc</i>. (Cf. 1804.)
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> R. suggests, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Gewát him on naca</span>,’ and renders: <i>The vessel set out, to
drive on the sea, the Dane-country left</i>. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">On</span>’ bears the alliteration; cf. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on
hafu</span>’ (2524). This has some advantages over the H.-So. reading; viz.
(1) It adds nothing to the text; (2) it makes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">naca</span>’ the subject, and thus
brings the passage into keeping with the context, where the poet has exhausted
his vocabulary in detailing the actions of the vessel.—B.’s emendation
(cf. P. and B. XII. 97) is violent.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> B. translates: <i>Who for a long time, ready at the coast, had looked out into
the distance eagerly for the dear men</i>. This changes the syntax of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">léofra
manna</span>.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wunað</span>’ (v. 1924) several eminent critics suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wunade</span>’ (=remained).
This makes the passage much clearer.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> Why should such a woman be described as an ‘excellent’ queen? C.
suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">frécnu</span>’ = dangerous, bold.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXVIII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XXVIII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">an dæges</span>’ various readings have been offered. If ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">and-éges</span>’ be
accepted, the sentence will read: <i>No hero … dared look upon her, eye to eye</i>.
If ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">án-dæges</span>’ be adopted, translate: <i>Dared look upon her the whole day</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXIX">
</section></body></html>