<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 31</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXI">XXXI.</a>GIFT-GIVING IS MUTUAL.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.1">“So the belovèd land-prince lived in decorum;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.2">I had missed no rewards, no meeds of my prowess,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.3">But he gave me jewels, regarding my wishes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.4">Healfdene his bairn; I’ll bring them to thee, then,</div>
<span class="sidenote">All my gifts I lay
at thy feet.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.5">Atheling of earlmen, offer them gladly.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.6">And still unto thee is all my affection:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXI.FNDEF.1" id="XXXI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.7">But few of my folk-kin find I surviving</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.8">But thee, dear Higelac!” Bade he in then to carry<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXI.FNDEF.2" id="XXXI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.9">The boar-image, banner, battle-high helmet,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.10">Iron-gray armor, the excellent weapon,</div>
<span class="sidenote">This armor I have
belonged of yore to
Heregar.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.11">In song-measures said: “This suit-for-the-battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.12">Hrothgar presented me, bade me expressly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.13">Wise-mooded atheling, thereafter to tell thee<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXI.FNDEF.3" id="XXXI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.14">The whole of its history, said King Heregar owned it,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.15">Dane-prince for long: yet he wished not to give then</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_74">[74]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.16">The mail to his son, though dearly he loved him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.17">Hereward the hardy. Hold all in joyance!”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.18">I heard that there followed hard on the jewels</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.19">Two braces of stallions of striking resemblance,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.20">Dappled and yellow; he granted him usance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.21">Of horses and treasures. So a kinsman should bear him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.22">No web of treachery weave for another,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.23">Nor by cunning craftiness cause the destruction</div>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac loves his
nephew Beowulf.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.24">Of trusty companion.  Most precious to Higelac,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.25">The bold one in battle, was the bairn of his sister,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.26">And each unto other mindful of favors.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf gives
Hygd the necklace
that Wealhtheow
had given him.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.27">I am told that to Hygd he proffered the necklace,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.28">Wonder-gem rare that Wealhtheow gave him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.29">The troop-leader’s daughter, a trio of horses</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.30">Slender and saddle-bright; soon did the jewel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.31">Embellish her bosom, when the beer-feast was over.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.32">So Ecgtheow’s bairn brave did prove him,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is famous.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.33">War-famous man, by deeds that were valiant,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.34">He lived in honor, belovèd companions</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.35">Slew not carousing; his mood was not cruel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.36">But by hand-strength hugest of heroes then living</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.37">The brave one retained the bountiful gift that</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.38">The Lord had allowed him. Long was he wretched,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.39">So that sons of the Geatmen accounted him worthless,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.40">And the lord of the liegemen loth was to do him</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.41">Mickle of honor, when mead-cups were passing;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.42">They fully believed him idle and sluggish,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He is requited for
the slights suffered
in earlier days.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.43">An indolent atheling: to the honor-blest man there</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.44">Came requital for the cuts he had suffered.</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.45">The folk-troop’s defender bade fetch to the building</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.46">The heirloom of Hrethel, embellished with gold,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac overwhelms
the conqueror
with gifts.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.47">So the brave one enjoined it; there was jewel no richer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.48">In the form of a weapon ’mong Geats of that era;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.49">In Beowulf’s keeping he placed it and gave him</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.50">Seven of thousands, manor and lordship.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.51">Common to both was land ’mong the people,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_75">[75]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.52">Estate and inherited rights and possessions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.53">To the second one specially spacious dominions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.54">To the one who was better. It afterward happened</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.55">In days that followed, befell the battle-thanes,</div>
<span class="sidenote">After Heardred’s
death, Beowulf becomes
king.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.56">After Higelac’s death, and when Heardred was murdered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.57">With weapons of warfare ’neath well-covered targets,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.58">When valiant battlemen in victor-band sought him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.59">War-Scylfing heroes harassed the nephew</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.60">Of Hereric in battle. To Beowulf’s keeping</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.61">Turned there in time extensive dominions:</div>
<span class="sidenote">He rules the Geats
fifty years.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.62">He fittingly ruled them a fifty of winters</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.63">(He a man-ruler wise was, manor-ward old) till</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.64">A certain one ’gan, on gloom-darkening nights, a</div>
<span class="sidenote">The fire-drake.</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.65">Dragon, to govern, who guarded a treasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.66">A high-rising stone-cliff, on heath that was grayish:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.67">A path ’neath it lay, unknown unto mortals.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.68">Some one of earthmen entered the mountain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.69">The heathenish hoard laid hold of with ardor;</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.70">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.71">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.72">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.73">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXI.74">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> This verse B. renders, ‘<i>Now serve I again thee alone as my gracious king</i>.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eafor</span>’ (2153), Kl. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ealdor</span>.’ Translate then: <i>Bade the
prince then to bear in the banner, battle-high helmet, etc</i>. On the other hand,
W. takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eaforhéafodsegn</span>’ as a compound, meaning ‘helmet’: <i>He bade them
bear in the helmet, battle-high helm, gray armor, etc</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The H.-So. rendering (<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ærest</span> = <i>history, origin</i>; ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eft</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">est</span>’), though
liable to objection, is perhaps the best offered. ‘That I should very early tell
thee of his favor, kindness’ sounds well; but ‘his’ is badly placed to limit
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ést</span>.’—Perhaps, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eft</span>’ with verbs of saying may have the force of Lat. prefix
‘<span class="la" lang="la" xml:lang="la">re</span>,’ and the H.-So. reading mean, ‘that I should its origin rehearse to thee.’
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXXII">
</section></body></html>