<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 38</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXVIII">XXXVIII.</a>WIGLAF PLUNDERS THE DRAGON’S DEN.—BEOWULF’S
DEATH.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf fulfils his
lord’s behest.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.1">Then heard I that Wihstan’s son very quickly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.2">These words being uttered, heeded his liegelord</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.3">Wounded and war-sick, went in his armor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.4">His well-woven ring-mail, ’neath the roof of the barrow.</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.5">Then the trusty retainer treasure-gems many</div>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon’s den.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.6">Victorious saw, when the seat he came near to,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.7">Gold-treasure sparkling spread on the bottom,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.8">Wonder on the wall, and the worm-creature’s cavern,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.9">The ancient dawn-flier’s, vessels a-standing,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.10">Cups of the ancients of cleansers bereavèd,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.11">Robbed of their ornaments: there were helmets in numbers,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.12">Old and rust-eaten, arm-bracelets many,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.13">Artfully woven. Wealth can easily,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.14">Gold on the sea-bottom, turn into vanity<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXVIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.15">Each one of earthmen, arm him who pleaseth!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.16">And he saw there lying an all-golden banner</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.17">High o’er the hoard, of hand-wonders greatest,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.18">Linkèd with lacets: a light from it sparkled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.19">That the floor of the cavern he was able to look on,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon is not
there.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.20">To examine the jewels. Sight of the dragon</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_94">[94]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.21">Not any was offered, but edge offcarried him.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf bears the
hoard away.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.22">Then I heard that the hero the hoard-treasure plundered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.23">The giant-work ancient reaved in the cavern,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.24">Bare on his bosom the beakers and platters,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.25">As himself would fain have it, and took off the standard,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.26">The brightest of beacons;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXVIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> the bill had erst injured</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.27">(Its edge was of iron), the old-ruler’s weapon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.28">Him who long had watched as ward of the jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.29">Who fire-terror carried hot for the treasure,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.30">Rolling in battle, in middlemost darkness,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.31">Till murdered he perished. The messenger hastened,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.32">Not loth to return, hurried by jewels:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.33">Curiosity urged him if, excellent-mooded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.34">Alive he should find the lord of the Weders</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.35">Mortally wounded, at the place where he left him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.36">’Mid the jewels he found then the famous old chieftain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.37">His liegelord belovèd, at his life’s-end gory:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.38">He thereupon ’gan to lave him with water,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.39">Till the point of his word piercèd his breast-hoard.</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.40">Beowulf spake (the gold-gems he noticed),</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is rejoiced
to see the jewels.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.41">The old one in sorrow: “For the jewels I look on</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.42">Thanks do I utter for all to the Ruler,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.43">Wielder of Worship, with words of devotion,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.44">The Lord everlasting, that He let me such treasures</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.45">Gain for my people ere death overtook me.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.46">Since I’ve bartered the agèd life to me granted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.47">For treasure of jewels, attend ye henceforward</div>
<span class="sidenote">He desires to be
held in memory by
his people.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.48">The wants of the war-thanes; I can wait here no longer.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.49">The battle-famed bid ye to build them a grave-hill,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.50">Bright when I’m burned, at the brim-current’s limit;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.51">As a memory-mark to the men I have governed,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_95">[95]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.52">Aloft it shall tower on Whale’s-Ness uprising,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.53">That earls of the ocean hereafter may call it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.54">Beowulf’s barrow, those who barks ever-dashing</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.55">From a distance shall drive o’er the darkness of waters.”</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hero’s last
gift</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.56">The bold-mooded troop-lord took from his neck then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.57">The ring that was golden, gave to his liegeman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.58">The youthful war-hero, his gold-flashing helmet,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.59">His collar and war-mail, bade him well to enjoy them:</div>
<span class="sidenote">and last words.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.60">“Thou art latest left of the line of our kindred,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.61">Of Wægmunding people: Weird hath offcarried</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.62">All of my kinsmen to the Creator’s glory,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.63">Earls in their vigor: I shall after them fare.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.64">’Twas the aged liegelord’s last-spoken word in</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.65">His musings of spirit, ere he mounted the fire,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.66">The battle-waves burning: from his bosom departed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVIII.67">His soul to seek the sainted ones’ glory.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXVIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The word ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oferhígian</span>’ (2767) being vague and little understood, two
quite distinct translations of this passage have arisen. One takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oferhígian</span>’
as meaning ‘to exceed,’ and, inserting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord</span>’ after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehwone</span>,’ renders: <i>The
treasure may easily, the gold in the ground, exceed in value every hoard of
man, hide it who will.</i> The other takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oferhígian</span>’ as meaning ‘to render
arrogant,’ and, giving the sentence a moralizing tone, renders substantially as
in the body of this work. (Cf. <a href="#L.XXVIII.13">28 <span class="smaller">13</span></a> et seq.)
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXVIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The passage beginning here is very much disputed. ‘The bill of the old
lord’ is by some regarded as Beowulf’s sword; by others, as that of the
ancient possessor of the hoard. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Ær gescód</span>’ (2778), translated in this work
as verb and adverb, is by some regarded as a compound participial adj. =
<i>sheathed in brass</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXXIX">
</section></body></html>