<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 41</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-41" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XLI">XLI.</a>THE MESSENGER’S RETROSPECT.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">The messenger
continues, and
refers to the feuds
of Swedes and
Geats.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.1">“The blood-stainèd trace of Swedes and Geatmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.2">The death-rush of warmen, widely was noticed,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.3">How the folks with each other feud did awaken.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.4">The worthy one went then<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.1" id="XLI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> with well-beloved comrades,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.5">Old and dejected to go to the fastness,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.6">Ongentheo earl upward then turned him;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.7">Of Higelac’s battle he’d heard on inquiry,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.8">The exultant one’s prowess, despaired of resistance,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.9">With earls of the ocean to be able to struggle,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.10">’Gainst sea-going sailors to save the hoard-treasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.11">His wife and his children; he fled after thenceward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.12">Old ’neath the earth-wall. Then was offered pursuance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.13">To the braves of the Swedemen, the banner<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.2" id="XLI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> to Higelac.</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_100">[100]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.14">They fared then forth o’er the field-of-protection,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.15">When the Hrethling heroes hedgeward had thronged them.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.16">Then with edges of irons was Ongentheow driven,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.17">The gray-haired to tarry, that the troop-ruler had to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.18">Suffer the power solely of Eofor:</div>
<span class="sidenote">Wulf wounds
Ongentheow.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.19">Wulf then wildly with weapon assaulted him,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.20">Wonred his son, that for swinge of the edges</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.21">The blood from his body burst out in currents,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.22">Forth ’neath his hair. He feared not however,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.23">Gray-headed Scylfing, but speedily quited</div>
<span class="sidenote">Ongentheow gives
a stout blow in
return.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.24">The wasting wound-stroke with worse exchange,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.25">When the king of the thane-troop thither did turn him:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.26">The wise-mooded son of Wonred was powerless</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.27">To give a return-blow to the age-hoary man,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.28">But his head-shielding helmet first hewed he to pieces,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.29">That flecked with gore perforce he did totter,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.30">Fell to the earth; not fey was he yet then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.31">But up did he spring though an edge-wound had reached him.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Eofor smites Ongentheow
fiercely.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.32">Then Higelac’s vassal, valiant and dauntless,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.33">When his brother lay dead, made his broad-bladed weapon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.34">Giant-sword ancient, defence of the giants,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.35">Bound o’er the shield-wall; the folk-prince succumbed then,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Ongentheow is
slain.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.36">Shepherd of people, was pierced to the vitals.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.37">There were many attendants who bound up his kinsman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.38">Carried him quickly when occasion was granted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.39">That the place of the slain they were suffered to manage.</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.40">This pending, one hero plundered the other,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.41">His armor of iron from Ongentheow ravished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.42">His hard-sword hilted and helmet together;</div>
<span class="sidenote">Eofor takes the
old king’s war-gear
to Higelac.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.43">The old one’s equipments he carried to Higelac.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.44">He the jewels received, and rewards ’mid the troopers</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.45">Graciously promised, and so did accomplish:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.46">The king of the Weders requited the war-rush,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.47">Hrethel’s descendant, when home he repaired him,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac rewards
the brothers.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.48">To Eofor and Wulf with wide-lavished treasures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.49">To each of them granted a hundred of thousands</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_101">[101]</span>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.50">In land and rings wrought out of wire:</div>
<span class="sidenote">His gifts were beyond
cavil.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.51">None upon mid-earth needed to twit him<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.3" id="XLI.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.52">With the gifts he gave them, when glory they conquered;</div>
<span class="sidenote">To Eofor he also
gives his only
daughter in marriage.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.53">And to Eofor then gave he his one only daughter,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.54">The honor of home, as an earnest of favor.</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.55">That’s the feud and hatred—as ween I ’twill happen—</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.56">The anger of earthmen, that earls of the Swedemen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.57">Will visit on us, when they hear that our leader</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.58">Lifeless is lying, he who longtime protected</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.59">His hoard and kingdom ’gainst hating assailers,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.60">Who on the fall of the heroes defended of yore</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.61">The deed-mighty Scyldings,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.4" id="XLI.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> did for the troopers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.62">What best did avail them, and further moreover</div>
<span class="sidenote">It is time for us to
pay the last marks
of respect to our
lord.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.63">Hero-deeds ’complished.  Now is haste most fitting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.64">That the lord of liegemen we look upon yonder,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.65">And <i>that</i> one carry on journey to death-pyre</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.66">Who ring-presents gave us. Not aught of it all</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.67">Shall melt with the brave one—there’s a mass of bright jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.68">Gold beyond measure, grewsomely purchased</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.69">And ending it all ornament-rings too</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.70">Bought with his life; these fire shall devour,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.71">Flame shall cover, no earlman shall wear</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.72">A jewel-memento, nor beautiful virgin</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.73">Have on her neck rings to adorn her,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.74">But wretched in spirit bereavèd of gold-gems</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.75">She shall oft with others be exiled and banished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.76">Since the leader of liegemen hath laughter forsaken,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_102">[102]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.77">Mirth and merriment. Hence many a war-spear</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.78">Cold from the morning shall be clutched in the fingers,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.79">Heaved in the hand, no harp-music’s sound shall</div>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.80">Waken the warriors, but the wan-coated raven</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.81">Fain over fey ones freely shall gabble,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.82">Shall say to the eagle how he sped in the eating,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.83">When, the wolf his companion, he plundered the slain.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.84">So the high-minded hero was rehearsing these stories</div>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.85">Loathsome to hear; he lied as to few of</div>
<span class="sidenote">The warriors go
sadly to look at
Beowulf’s lifeless
body.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.86">Weirds and of words. All the war-troop arose then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.87">’Neath the Eagle’s Cape sadly betook them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.88">Weeping and woful, the wonder to look at.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.89">They saw on the sand then soulless a-lying,</div>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.90">His slaughter-bed holding, him who rings had given them</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.91">In days that were done; then the death-bringing moment</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.92">Was come to the good one, that the king very warlike,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.93">Wielder of Weders, with wonder-death perished.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.94">First they beheld there a creature more wondrous,</div>
<span class="sidenote">They also see the
dragon.</span>
<span class="linenum">95</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.95">The worm on the field, in front of them lying,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.96">The foeman before them: the fire-spewing dragon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.97">Ghostly and grisly guest in his terrors,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.98">Was scorched in the fire; as he lay there he measured</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.99">Fifty of feet; came forth in the night-time<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.5" id="XLI.FNREF.5">5</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">100</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.100">To rejoice in the air, thereafter departing</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.101">To visit his den; he in death was then fastened,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.102">He would joy in no other earth-hollowed caverns.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.103">There stood round about him beakers and vessels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.104">Dishes were lying and dear-valued weapons,</div>
<span class="linenum">105</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.105">With iron-rust eaten, as in earth’s mighty bosom</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.106">A thousand of winters there they had rested:</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hoard was
under a magic
spell.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.107">That mighty bequest then with magic was guarded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.108">Gold of the ancients, that earlman not any</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.109">The ring-hall could touch, save Ruling-God only,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_103">[103]</span>
<span class="linenum">110</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.110">Sooth-king of Vict’ries gave whom He wished to</div>
<span class="sidenote">God alone could
give access to it.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.111"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLI.FNDEF.6" id="XLI.FNREF.6">6</a></sup>(He is earth-folk’s protector) to open the treasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLI.112">E’en to such among mortals as seemed to Him proper.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">góda</span>,’ which seems a surprising epithet for a Geat to apply to the
“terrible” Ongentheow, B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gomela</span>.’ The passage would then
stand: ‘<i>The old one went then,’ etc.</i>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">segn Higeláce</span>,’ K., Th., and B. propose ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">segn Higeláces</span>,’ meaning:
<i>Higelac’s banner followed the Swedes (in pursuit).</i>—S. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sæcc Higeláces</span>,’
and renders: <i>Higelac’s pursuit.</i>—The H.-So. reading, as translated in
our text, means that the banner of the enemy was captured and brought to
Higelac as a trophy.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The rendering given in this translation represents the king as being generous
beyond the possibility of reproach; but some authorities construe ‘him’
(2996) as plu., and understand the passage to mean that no one reproached
the two brothers with having received more reward than they were entitled to.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.4">[4]</a> The name ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Scyldingas</span>’ here (3006) has caused much discussion, and given
rise to several theories, the most important of which are as follows: (1) After
the downfall of Hrothgar’s family, Beowulf was king of the Danes, or Scyldings.
(2) For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Scyldingas</span>’ read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Scylfingas</span>’—that is, after killing Eadgils,
the Scylfing prince, Beowulf conquered his land, and held it in subjection.
(3) M. considers 3006 a thoughtless repetition of 2053. (Cf. H.-So.)
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.5">[5]</a> B. takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">nihtes</span>’ and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwílum</span>’ (3045) as separate adverbial cases, and
renders: <i>Joy in the air had he of yore by night, etc</i>. He thinks that the idea of
vanished time ought to be expressed.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLI.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XLI.FNREF.6">[6]</a> The parenthesis is by some emended so as to read: (1) (<i>He</i> (i.e. <i>God</i>)
<i>is the hope of men</i>); (2) (<i>he is the hope of heroes</i>). Gr.’s reading has no
parenthesis, but says: … <i>could touch, unless God himself, true king of victories,
gave to whom he would to open the treasure, the secret place of enchanters,
etc</i>. The last is rejected on many grounds.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XLII">
</section></body></html>