<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
<span>XVII.</span>
<span>BANQUET (<i>continued</i>).—THE SCOP’S SONG OF FINN AND HNÆF.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.1">And the atheling of earlmen to each of the heroes</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.2">Who the ways of the waters went with Beowulf,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.3">A costly gift-token gave on the mead-bench,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.4">Offered an heirloom, and ordered that that man</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.5">With gold should be paid for, whom Grendel had erstwhile</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.6">Wickedly slaughtered, as he more of them had done</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.7">Had far-seeing God and the mood of the hero</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.8">The fate not averted: the Father then governed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.9">All of the earth-dwellers, as He ever is doing;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.10">Hence insight for all men is everywhere fittest,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.11">Forethought of spirit! much he shall suffer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.12">Of lief and of loathsome who long in this present</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.13">Useth the world in this woful existence.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.14">There was music and merriment mingling together</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.15">Touching Healfdene’s leader; the joy-wood was fingered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.16">Measures recited, when the singer of Hrothgar</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.17">On mead-bench should mention the merry hall-joyance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.18">Of the kinsmen of Finn, when onset surprised them:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.19">“The Half-Danish hero, Hnæf of the Scyldings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.20">On the field of the Frisians was fated to perish.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.21">Sure Hildeburg needed not mention approving</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.22">The faith of the Jutemen: though blameless entirely,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.23">When shields were shivered she was shorn of her darlings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.24">Of bairns and brothers: they bent to their fate</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.25">With war-spear wounded; woe was that woman.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.26">Not causeless lamented the daughter of Hoce</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.27">The decree of the Wielder when morning-light came and</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.28">She was able ’neath heaven to behold the destruction</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.29">Of brothers and bairns, where the brightest of earth-joys</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.30">She had hitherto had: all the henchmen of Finn</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.31">War had offtaken, save a handful remaining,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.32">That he nowise was able to offer resistance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.33">To the onset of Hengest in the parley of battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.34">Nor the wretched remnant to rescue in war from</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.35">The earl of the atheling; but they offered conditions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.36">Another great building to fully make ready,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.37">A hall and a high-seat, that half they might rule with</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.38">The sons of the Jutemen, and that Folcwalda’s son would</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.39">Day after day the Danemen honor</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.40">When gifts were giving, and grant of his ring-store</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.41">To Hengest’s earl-troop ever so freely,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.42">Of his gold-plated jewels, as he encouraged the Frisians</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.43">On the bench of the beer-hall. On both sides they swore then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.44">A fast-binding compact; Finn unto Hengest</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.45">With no thought of revoking vowed then most solemnly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.46">The woe-begone remnant well to take charge of,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.47">His Witan advising; the agreement should no one</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.48">By words or works weaken and shatter,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.49">By artifice ever injure its value,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.50">Though reaved of their ruler their ring-giver’s slayer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.51">They followed as vassals, Fate so requiring:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.52">Then if one of the Frisians the quarrel should speak of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.53">In tones that were taunting, terrible edges</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.54">Should cut in requital. Accomplished the oath was,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.55">And treasure of gold from the hoard was uplifted.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.56">The best of the Scylding braves was then fully</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.57">Prepared for the pile; at the pyre was seen clearly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.58">The blood-gory burnie, the boar with his gilding,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.59">The iron-hard swine, athelings many</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.60">Fatally wounded; no few had been slaughtered.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.61">Hildeburg bade then, at the burning of Hnæf,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.62">The bairn of her bosom to bear to the fire,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.63">That his body be burned and borne to the pyre.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.64">The woe-stricken woman wept on his shoulder</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.65">In measures lamented; upmounted the hero.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.66">The greatest of dead-fires curled to the welkin,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.67">On the hill’s-front crackled; heads were a-melting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.68">Wound-doors bursting, while the blood was a-coursing</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.69">From body-bite fierce. The fire devoured them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.70">Greediest of spirits, whom war had offcarried</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVII.71">From both of the peoples; their bravest were fallen.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>