<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.III">III.</a>GRENDEL THE MURDERER.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel attacks the
sleeping heroes</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.1">When the sun was sunken, he set out to visit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.2">The lofty hall-building, how the Ring-Danes had used it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.3">For beds and benches when the banquet was over.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.4">Then he found there reposing many a noble</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.5">Asleep after supper; sorrow the heroes,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.1" id="III.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.6">Misery knew not. The monster of evil</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.7">Greedy and cruel tarried but little,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He drags off thirty
of them, and devours
them</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.8">Fell and frantic, and forced from their slumbers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.9">Thirty of thanemen; thence he departed</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.10">Leaping and laughing, his lair to return to,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.11">With surfeit of slaughter sallying homeward.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.12">In the dusk of the dawning, as the day was just breaking,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.13">Was Grendel’s prowess revealed to the warriors:</div>
<span class="sidenote">A cry of agony
goes up, when
Grendel’s horrible
deed is fully realized.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.14">Then, his meal-taking finished, a moan was uplifted,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.15">Morning-cry mighty. The man-ruler famous,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.16">The long-worthy atheling, sat very woful,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.17">Suffered great sorrow, sighed for his liegemen,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_6">[6]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.18">When they had seen the track of the hateful pursuer,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.19">The spirit accursèd: too crushing that sorrow,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The monster returns
the next
night.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.20">Too loathsome and lasting. Not longer he tarried,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.21">But one night after continued his slaughter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.22">Shameless and shocking, shrinking but little</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.23">From malice and murder; they mastered him fully.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.24">He was easy to find then who otherwhere looked for</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.25">A pleasanter place of repose in the lodges,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.26">A bed in the bowers. Then was brought to his notice</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.27">Told him truly by token apparent</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.28">The hall-thane’s hatred: he held himself after</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.29">Further and faster who the foeman did baffle.</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.30"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.2" id="III.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>So ruled he and strongly strove against justice</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.31">Lone against all men, till empty uptowered</div>
<span class="sidenote">King Hrothgar’s
agony and suspense
last twelve
years.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.32">The choicest of houses. Long was the season:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.33">Twelve-winters’ time torture suffered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.34">The friend of the Scyldings, every affliction,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.35">Endless agony; hence it after<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.3" id="III.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> became</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.36">Certainly known to the children of men</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.37">Sadly in measures, that long against Hrothgar</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.38">Grendel struggled:—his grudges he cherished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.39">Murderous malice, many a winter,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.40">Strife unremitting, and peacefully wished he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.41"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.4" id="III.FNREF.4">4</a></sup>Life-woe to lift from no liegeman at all of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.42">The men of the Dane-folk, for money to settle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.43">No counsellor needed count for a moment</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_7">[7]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.44">On handsome amends at the hands of the murderer;</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel is unremitting
in his persecutions.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.45">The monster of evil fiercely did harass,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.46">The ill-planning death-shade, both elder and younger,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.47">Trapping and tricking them. He trod every night then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.48">The mist-covered moor-fens; men do not know where</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.49">Witches and wizards wander and ramble.</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.50">So the foe of mankind many of evils</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.51">Grievous injuries, often accomplished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.52">Horrible hermit; Heort he frequented,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.53">Gem-bedecked palace, when night-shades had fallen</div>
<span class="sidenote">God is against the
monster.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.54">(Since God did oppose him, not the throne could he touch,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#III.FNDEF.5" id="III.FNREF.5">5</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.55">The light-flashing jewel, love of Him knew not).</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.56">’Twas a fearful affliction to the friend of the Scyldings</div>
<span class="sidenote">The king and his
council deliberate
in vain.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.57">Soul-crushing sorrow. Not seldom in private</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.58">Sat the king in his council; conference held they</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.59">What the braves should determine ’gainst terrors unlooked for.</div>
<span class="sidenote">They invoke the
aid of their gods.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.60">At the shrines of their idols often they promised</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.61">Gifts and offerings, earnestly prayed they</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.62">The devil from hell would help them to lighten</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.63">Their people’s oppression. Such practice they used then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.64">Hope of the heathen; hell they remembered</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.65">In innermost spirit, God they knew not,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The true God they
do not know.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.66">Judge of their actions, All-wielding Ruler,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.67">No praise could they give the Guardian of Heaven,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.68">The Wielder of Glory. Woe will be his who</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.69">Through furious hatred his spirit shall drive to</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.III.70">The clutch of the fire, no comfort shall look for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.71">Wax no wiser; well for the man who,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.72">Living his life-days, his Lord may face</div>
<div class="l" id="L.III.73">And find defence in his Father’s embrace!</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#III.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The translation is based on ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">weras</span>,’  adopted by H.-So.—K. and Th.
read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wera</span>’  and, arranging differently, render 119(2)-120: <i>They knew not
sorrow, the wretchedness of man, aught of misfortune</i>.—For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unhælo</span>’  (120)
R. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unfælo</span>’: <i>The uncanny creature, greedy and cruel, etc</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#III.FNREF.2">[2]</a> S. rearranges and translates: <i>So he ruled and struggled unjustly, one against
all, till the noblest of buildings stood useless (it was a long while) twelve years’
time: the friend of the Scyldings suffered distress, every woe, great sorrows, etc</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#III.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">syððan</span>,’  B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sárcwidum</span>’: <i>Hence in mournful words it became
well known, etc</i>. Various other words beginning with ‘s’ have been
conjectured.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#III.FNREF.4">[4]</a> The H.-So. glossary is very inconsistent in referring to this passage.—‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sibbe</span>’
(154), which H.-So. regards as an instr., B. takes as accus., obj. of
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wolde</span>.’  Putting a comma after <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Deniga</span>, he renders: <i>He did not desire
peace with any of the Danes, nor did he wish to remove their life-woe, nor to
settle for money</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="III.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#III.FNREF.5">[5]</a> Of this difficult passage the following interpretations among others are
given: (1) Though Grendel has frequented Heorot as a demon, he could not
become ruler of the Danes, on account of his hostility to God. (2) Hrothgar
was much grieved that Grendel had not appeared before his throne to receive
presents. (3) He was not permitted to devastate the hall, on account of the
Creator; <i>i.e.</i> God wished to make his visit fatal to him.—<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Ne … wisse</span> (169)
W. renders: <i>Nor had he any desire to do so</i>; ‘his’  being obj. gen. = <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">danach</span>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="IV">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_8">[8]</span>
</section></body></html>