<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XV">XV.</a>HROTHGAR’S GRATITUDE.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.1">Hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.2">He stood by the pillar,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XV.FNDEF.1" id="XV.FNREF.1" title="B. and t.B. read ‘staþole,’ and translate stood on the floor.">1</a></sup> saw the steep-rising hall-roof</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.3">Gleaming with gold-gems, and Grendel his hand there):</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar gives
thanks for the
overthrow of the
monster.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.4">“For the sight we behold now, thanks to the Wielder</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.5">Early be offered! Much evil I bided,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.6">Snaring from Grendel:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XV.FNDEF.2" id="XV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> God can e’er ’complish</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.7">Wonder on wonder, Wielder of Glory!</div>
<span class="sidenote">I had given up all
hope, when this
brave liegeman
came to our aid.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.8">But lately I reckoned ne’er under heaven</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.9">Comfort to gain me for any of sorrows,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.10">While the handsomest of houses horrid with bloodstain</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.11">Gory uptowered; grief had offfrightened<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XV.FNDEF.3" id="XV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.12">Each of the wise ones who weened not that ever</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.13">The folk-troop’s defences ’gainst foes they should strengthen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.14">’Gainst sprites and monsters. Through the might of the Wielder</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.15">A doughty retainer hath a deed now accomplished</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.16">Which erstwhile we all with our excellent wisdom</div>
<span class="sidenote">If his mother yet
liveth, well may
she thank God for
this son.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.17">Failed to perform. May affirm very truly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.18">What woman soever in all of the nations</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.19">Gave birth to the child, if yet she surviveth,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.20">That the long-ruling Lord was lavish to herward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.21">In the birth of the bairn. Now, Beowulf dear,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hereafter, Beowulf,
thou shalt be
my son.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.22">Most excellent hero, I’ll love thee in spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.23">As bairn of my body; bear well henceforward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.24">The relationship new. No lack shall befall thee</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.25">Of earth-joys any I ever can give thee.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.26">Full often for lesser service I’ve given</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_34">[34]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.27">Hero less hardy hoard-treasure precious,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Thou hast won immortal
distinction.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.28">To a weaker in war-strife. By works of distinction</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.29">Thou hast gained for thyself now that thy glory shall flourish</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.30">Forever and ever. The All-Ruler quite thee</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.31">With good from His hand as He hitherto did thee!”</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf replies:
I was most happy
to render thee this
service.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.32">Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow’s offspring:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.33">“That labor of glory most gladly achieved we,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.34">The combat accomplished, unquailing we ventured</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.35">The enemy’s grapple; I would grant it much rather</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.36">Thou wert able to look at the creature in person,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.37">Faint unto falling, the foe in his trappings!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.38">On murder-bed quickly I minded to bind him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.39">With firm-holding fetters, that forced by my grapple</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.40">Low he should lie in life-and-death struggle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.41">’Less his body escape; I was wholly unable,</div>
<span class="sidenote">I could not keep
the monster from
escaping, as God
did not will that I
should.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.42">Since God did not will it, to keep him from going,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.43">Not held him that firmly, hated opposer;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.44">Too swift was the foeman. Yet safety regarding</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.45">He suffered his hand behind him to linger,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.46">His arm and shoulder, to act as watcher;</div>
<span class="sidenote">He left his hand
and arm behind.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.47">No shadow of solace the woe-begone creature</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.48">Found him there nathless: the hated destroyer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.49">Liveth no longer, lashed for his evils,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.50">But sorrow hath seized him, in snare-meshes hath him</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.51">Close in its clutches, keepeth him writhing</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.52">In baleful bonds: there banished for evil</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.53">The man shall wait for the mighty tribunal,</div>
<span class="sidenote">God will give him
his deserts.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.54">How the God of glory shall give him his earnings.”</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.55">Then the soldier kept silent, son of old Ecglaf,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Unferth has nothing
more to say,
for Beowulf’s actions
speak louder
than words.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.56">From boasting and bragging of battle-achievements,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.57">Since the princes beheld there the hand that depended</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.58">’Neath the lofty hall-timbers by the might of the nobleman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.59">Each one before him, the enemy’s fingers;</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.60">Each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.61">The heathen one’s hand-spur, the hero-in-battle’s</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.62">Claw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_35">[35]</span>
<span class="sidenote">No sword will
harm the monster.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.63">That not any excellent edges of brave ones</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.64">Was willing to touch him, the terrible creature’s</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XV.65">Battle-hand bloody to bear away from him.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. and t.B. read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">staþole</span>,’ and translate <i>stood on the floor</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘snaring from Grendel,’ ‘sorrows at Grendel’s hands’ has been suggested.
This gives a parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láðes</span>.’ ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Grynna</span>’ may well be gen. pl. of
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gyrn</span>,’ by a scribal slip.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The H.-So punctuation has been followed; but B. has been followed in
understanding ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehwylcne</span>’ as object of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wíd-scofen (hæfde)</span>.’ Gr. construes
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wéa</span>’ as nom abs.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XVI">
</section></body></html>