<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 34</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXIV">XXXIV.</a>BEOWULF SEEKS THE DRAGON.—BEOWULF’S REMINISCENCES.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.1">He planned requital for the folk-leader’s ruin</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.2">In days thereafter, to Eadgils the wretched</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.3">Becoming an enemy. Ohthere’s son then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.4">Went with a war-troop o’er the wide-stretching currents</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.5">With warriors and weapons: with woe-journeys cold he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.6">After avenged him, the king’s life he took.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf has been
preserved through
many perils.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.7">So he came off uninjured from all of his battles,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.8">Perilous fights, offspring of Ecgtheow,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.9">From his deeds of daring, till that day most momentous</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.10">When he fate-driven fared to fight with the dragon.</div>
<span class="sidenote">With eleven comrades,
he seeks the
dragon.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.11">With eleven companions the prince of the Geatmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.12">Went lowering with fury to look at the fire-drake:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.13">Inquiring he’d found how the feud had arisen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.14">Hate to his heroes; the highly-famed gem-vessel</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.15">Was brought to his keeping through the hand of th’ informer.</div>
<span class="sidenote">A guide leads the
way, but</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.16">That in the throng was thirteenth of heroes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.17">That caused the beginning of conflict so bitter,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.18">Captive and wretched, must sad-mooded thenceward</div>
<span class="sidenote">very reluctantly.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.19">Point out the place: he passed then unwillingly</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.20">To the spot where he knew of the notable cavern,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.21">The cave under earth, not far from the ocean,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.22">The anger of eddies, which inward was full of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.23">Jewels and wires: a warden uncanny,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_82">[82]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.24">Warrior weaponed, wardered the treasure,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.25">Old under earth; no easy possession</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.26">For any of earth-folk access to get to.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.27">Then the battle-brave atheling sat on the naze-edge,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.28">While the gold-friend of Geatmen gracious saluted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.29">His fireside-companions: woe was his spirit,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.30">Death-boding, wav’ring; Weird very near him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.31">Who must seize the old hero, his soul-treasure look for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.32">Dragging aloof his life from his body:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.33">Not flesh-hidden long was the folk-leader’s spirit.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.34">Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s son:</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s retrospect.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.35">“I survived in my youth-days many a conflict,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.36">Hours of onset: that all I remember.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.37">I was seven-winters old when the jewel-prince took me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.38">High-lord of heroes, at the hands of my father,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.39">Hrethel the hero-king had me in keeping,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrethel took me
when I was seven.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.40">Gave me treasure and feasting, our kinship remembered;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.41">Not ever was I <i>any</i> less dear to him</div>
<span class="sidenote">He treated me as
a son.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.42">Knight in the boroughs, than the bairns of his household,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.43">Herebald and Hæthcyn and Higelac mine.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.44">To the eldest unjustly by acts of a kinsman</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.45">Was murder-bed strewn, since him Hæthcyn from horn-bow</div>
<span class="sidenote">One of the brothers
accidentally kills
another.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.46">His sheltering chieftain shot with an arrow,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.47">Erred in his aim and injured his kinsman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.48">One brother the other, with blood-sprinkled spear:</div>
<span class="sidenote">No fee could compound
for such a
calamity.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.49">’Twas a feeless fight, finished in malice,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.50">Sad to his spirit; the folk-prince however</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.51">Had to part from existence with vengeance untaken.</div>
<span class="sidenote">[A parallel case
is supposed.]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.52">So to hoar-headed hero ’tis heavily crushing<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIV.FNDEF.1" id="XXXIV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_83">[83]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.53">To live to see his son as he rideth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.54">Young on the gallows: then measures he chanteth,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.55">A song of sorrow, when his son is hanging</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.56">For the raven’s delight, and aged and hoary</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.57">He is unable to offer any assistance.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.58">Every morning his offspring’s departure</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.59">Is constant recalled: he cares not to wait for</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.60">The birth of an heir in his borough-enclosures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.61">Since that one through death-pain the deeds hath experienced.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.62">He heart-grieved beholds in the house of his son the</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.63">Wine-building wasted, the wind-lodging places</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.64">Reaved of their roaring; the riders are sleeping,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.65">The knights in the grave; there’s no sound of the harp-wood,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIV.66">Joy in the yards, as of yore were familiar.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXIV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Gomelum ceorle</span>’ (2445).—H. takes these words as referring to Hrethel;
but the translator here departs from his editor by understanding the poet to
refer to a hypothetical old man, introduced as an illustration of a father’s
sorrow.

<p>
Hrethrel had certainly never seen a son of his ride on the gallows to feed
the crows.
</p>
<p>
The passage beginning ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swá bið géomorlic</span>’ seems to be an effort to reach
a full simile, ‘as … so.’ ‘As it is mournful for an old man, etc. … so the
defence of the Weders (2463) bore heart-sorrow, etc.’ The verses 2451 to
2463½ would be parenthetical, the poet’s feelings being so strong as to interrupt
the simile. The punctuation of the fourth edition would be better—a
comma after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">galgan</span>’ (2447). The translation may be indicated as follows:
<i>(Just) as it is sad for an old man to see his son ride young on the gallows when
he himself is uttering mournful measures, a sorrowful song, while his son hangs
for a comfort to the raven, and he, old and infirm, cannot render him any
kelp—(he is constantly reminded, etc., 2451-2463)—so the defence of the
Weders, etc.</i>
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXXV">
</section></body></html>