<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XI">XI.</a>ALL SLEEP SAVE ONE.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar retires.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.1">Then Hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.2">Folk-lord of Scyldings, forth from the building;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.3">The war-chieftain wished then Wealhtheow to look for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.4">The queen for a bedmate. To keep away Grendel</div>
<span class="sidenote">God has provided
a watch for the
hall.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.5">The Glory of Kings had given a hall-watch,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.6">As men heard recounted: for the king of the Danemen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.7">He did special service, gave the giant a watcher:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.8">And the prince of the Geatmen implicitly trusted</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is self-confident</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.9">His warlike strength and the Wielder’s protection.</div>
<span class="sidenote">He prepares for
rest.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.10">His armor of iron off him he did then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.11">His helmet from his head, to his henchman committed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.12">His chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.13">And bade him bide with his battle-equipments.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.14">The good one then uttered words of defiance,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.15">Beowulf Geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf boasts of
his ability to cope
with Grendel.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.16">“I hold me no meaner in matters of prowess,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.17">In warlike achievements, than Grendel does himself;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.18">Hence I seek not with sword-edge to sooth him to slumber,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.19">Of life to bereave him, though well I am able.</div>
<span class="sidenote">We will fight with
nature’s weapons
only.</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.20">No battle-skill<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XI.FNDEF.1" id="XI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> has he, that blows he should strike me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.21">To shatter my shield, though sure he is mighty</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_25">[25]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.22">In strife and destruction; but struggling by night we</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.23">Shall do without edges, dare he to look for</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.24">Weaponless warfare, and wise-mooded Father</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.25">The glory apportion, God ever-holy,</div>
<span class="sidenote">God may decide
who shall conquer</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.26">On which hand soever to him seemeth proper.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.27">Then the brave-mooded hero bent to his slumber,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.28">The pillow received the cheek of the noble;</div>
<span class="sidenote">The Geatish warriors
lie down.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.29">And many a martial mere-thane attending</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.30">Sank to his slumber. Seemed it unlikely</div>
<span class="sidenote">They thought it
very unlikely that
they should ever
see their homes
again.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.31">That ever thereafter any should hope to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.32">Be happy at home, hero-friends visit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.33">Or the lordly troop-castle where he lived from his childhood;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.34">They had heard how slaughter had snatched from the wine-hall,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.35">Had recently ravished, of the race of the Scyldings</div>
<span class="sidenote">But God raised up
a deliverer.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.36">Too many by far. But the Lord to them granted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.37">The weaving of war-speed, to Wederish heroes</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.38">Aid and comfort, that every opponent</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.39">By one man’s war-might they worsted and vanquished,</div>
<span class="sidenote">God rules the
world.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.40">By the might of himself; the truth is established</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.41">That God Almighty hath governed for ages</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.42">Kindreds and nations. A night very lurid</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel comes to
Heorot.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.43">The trav’ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.44">The warriors were sleeping who should watch the horned-building,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Only one warrior
is awake.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.45">One only excepted. ’Mid earthmen ’twas ’stablished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.46">Th’ implacable foeman was powerless to hurl them</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.47">To the land of shadows, if the Lord were unwilling;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.48">But serving as warder, in terror to foemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XI.49">He angrily bided the issue of battle.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XI.FNDEF.2" id="XI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Gr. understood ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gódra</span>’ as meaning ‘advantages in battle.’ This rendering
H.-So. rejects. The latter takes the passage as meaning that Grendel,
though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> B. in his masterly articles on Beowulf (P. and B. XII.) rejects the division
usually made at this point, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þá</span>.’ (711), usually rendered ‘then,’ he translates
‘when,’ and connects its clause with the foregoing sentence. These changes
he makes to reduce the number of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cóm</span>’s’ as principal verbs. (Cf. 703, 711,
721.) With all deference to this acute scholar, I must say that it seems to me
that the poet is exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme event
on which the whole subsequent action turns. First, he (Grendel) came <i>in
the wan night</i>; second, he came <i>from the moor</i>; third, he came <i>to the hall</i>.
Time, place from which, place to which, are all given.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XII">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_26">[26]</span>
</section></body></html>