<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 33</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXIII">XXXIII.</a>BRAVE THOUGH AGED.—REMINISCENCES.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon spits
fire.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.1">The stranger began then to vomit forth fire,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.2">To burn the great manor; the blaze then glimmered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.3">For anguish to earlmen, not anything living</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_79">[79]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.4">Was the hateful air-goer willing to leave there.</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.5">The war of the worm widely was noticed,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.6">The feud of the foeman afar and anear,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.7">How the enemy injured the earls of the Geatmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.8">Harried with hatred: back he hied to the treasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.9">To the well-hidden cavern ere the coming of daylight.</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.10">He had circled with fire the folk of those regions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.11">With brand and burning; in the barrow he trusted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.12">In the wall and his war-might: the weening deceived him.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf hears of
the havoc wrought
by the dragon.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.13">Then straight was the horror to Beowulf published,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.14">Early forsooth, that his own native homestead,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.15">The best of buildings, was burning and melting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.16">Gift-seat of Geatmen. ’Twas a grief to the spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.17">Of the good-mooded hero, the greatest of sorrows:</div>
<span class="sidenote">He fears that
Heaven is punishing
him for some
crime.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.18">The wise one weened then that wielding his kingdom</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.19">’Gainst the ancient commandments, he had bitterly angered</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.20">The Lord everlasting: with lorn meditations</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.21">His bosom welled inward, as was nowise his custom.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.22">The fire-spewing dragon fully had wasted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.23">The fastness of warriors, the water-land outward,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.24">The manor with fire. The folk-ruling hero,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.25">Prince of the Weders, was planning to wreak him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.26">The warmen’s defender bade them to make him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.27">Earlmen’s atheling, an excellent war-shield</div>
<span class="sidenote">He orders an iron
shield to be made
from him, wood is
useless.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.28">Wholly of iron: fully he knew then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.29">That wood from the forest was helpless to aid him,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.30">Shield against fire. The long-worthy ruler</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.31">Must live the last of his limited earth-days,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.32">Of life in the world and the worm along with him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.33">Though he long had been holding hoard-wealth in plenty.</div>
<span class="sidenote">He determines to
fight alone.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.34">Then the ring-prince disdained to seek with a war-band,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.35">With army extensive, the air-going ranger;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.36">He felt no fear of the foeman’s assaults and</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.37">He counted for little the might of the dragon,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_80">[80]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.38">His power and prowess: for previously dared he</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s early
triumphs referred
to</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.39">A heap of hostility, hazarded dangers,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.40">War-thane, when Hrothgar’s palace he cleansèd,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.41">Conquering combatant, clutched in the battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.42">The kinsmen of Grendel, of kindred detested.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac’s death
recalled.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.43">’Twas of hand-fights not least where Higelac was slaughtered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.44">When the king of the Geatmen with clashings of battle,</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.45">Friend-lord of folks in Frisian dominions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.46">Offspring of Hrethrel perished through sword-drink,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.47">With battle-swords beaten; thence Beowulf came then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.48">On self-help relying, swam through the waters;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.49">He bare on his arm, lone-going, thirty</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.50">Outfits of armor, when the ocean he mounted.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.51">The Hetwars by no means had need to be boastful</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.52">Of their fighting afoot, who forward to meet him</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.53">Carried their war-shields: not many returned from</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.54">The brave-mooded battle-knight back to their homesteads.</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.55">Ecgtheow’s bairn o’er the bight-courses swam then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.56">Lone-goer lorn to his land-folk returning,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.57">Where Hygd to him tendered treasure and kingdom,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Heardred’s lack of
capacity to rule.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.58">Rings and dominion: her son she not trusted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.59">To be able to keep the kingdom devised him</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.60">’Gainst alien races, on the death of King Higelac.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s tact and
delicacy recalled.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.61">Yet the sad ones succeeded not in persuading the atheling</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.62">In any way ever, to act as a suzerain</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.63">To Heardred, or promise to govern the kingdom;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.64">Yet with friendly counsel in the folk he sustained him,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.65">Gracious, with honor, till he grew to be older,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Reference is here
made to a visit
which Beowulf receives
from Eanmund
and Eadgils,
why they come is
not known.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.66">Wielded the Weders. Wide-fleeing outlaws,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.67">Ohthere’s sons, sought him o’er the waters:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.68">They had stirred a revolt ’gainst the helm of the Scylfings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.69">The best of the sea-kings, who in Swedish dominions</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.70">Distributed treasure, distinguished folk-leader.</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_81">[81]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.71">’Twas the end of his earth-days; injury fatal<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXIII.FNDEF.3" id="XXXIII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.72">By swing of the sword he received as a greeting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.73">Offspring of Higelac; Ongentheow’s bairn</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.74">Later departed to visit his homestead,</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.75">When Heardred was dead; let Beowulf rule them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXIII.76">Govern the Geatmen: good was that folk-king.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Hám</span>’ (2326), the suggestion of B. is accepted by t.B. and other
scholars.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láðan cynnes</span>’ (2355), t.B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láðan cynne</span>,’ apposition to
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">mægum</span>.’ From syntactical and other considerations, this is a most excellent
emendation.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXIII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXIII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Gr. read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on feorme</span>’ (2386), rendering: <i>He there at the banquet a fatal
wound received by blows of the sword.</i>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXXIV">
</section></body></html>