<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XIV">XIV.</a>REJOICING OF THE DANES.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">At early dawn,
warriors from far
and near come together
to hear of
the night’s adventures.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.1">In the mist of the morning many a warrior</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.2">Stood round the gift-hall, as the story is told me:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.3">Folk-princes fared then from far and from near</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.4">Through long-stretching journeys to look at the wonder,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.5">The footprints of the foeman. Few of the warriors</div>
<span class="sidenote">Few warriors lamented
Grendel’s
destruction.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.6">Who gazed on the foot-tracks of the inglorious creature</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.7">His parting from life pained very deeply,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.8">How, weary in spirit, off from those regions</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.9">In combats conquered he carried his traces,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.10">Fated and flying, to the flood of the nickers.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s blood
dyes the waters.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.11">There in bloody billows bubbled the currents,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.12">The angry eddy was everywhere mingled</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.13">And seething with gore, welling with sword-blood;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.1" id="XIV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.14">He death-doomed had hid him, when reaved of his joyance</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.15">He laid down his life in the lair he had fled to,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.16">His heathenish spirit, where hell did receive him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.17">Thence the friends from of old backward turned them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.18">And many a younker from merry adventure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.19">Striding their stallions, stout from the seaward,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.20">Heroes on horses. There were heard very often</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is the hero
of the hour.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.21">Beowulf’s praises; many often asserted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.22">That neither south nor north, in the circuit of waters,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He is regarded as a
probable successor
to Hrothgar.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.23">O’er outstretching earth-plain, none other was better</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.24">’Mid bearers of war-shields, more worthy to govern,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.25">’Neath the arch of the ether. Not any, however,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.26">’Gainst the friend-lord muttered, mocking-words uttered</div>
<span class="sidenote">But no word is
uttered to derogate
from the old king</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.27">Of Hrothgar the gracious (a good king he).</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.28">Oft the famed ones permitted their fallow-skinned horses</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_31">[31]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.29">To run in rivalry, racing and chasing,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.30">Where the fieldways appeared to them fair and inviting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.31">Known for their excellence; oft a thane of the folk-lord,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.2" id="XIV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">The gleeman sings
the deeds of heroes.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.32"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.3" id="XIV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup>A man of celebrity, mindful of rhythms,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.33">Who ancient traditions treasured in memory,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.34">New word-groups found properly bound:</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.35">The bard after ’gan then Beowulf’s venture</div>
<span class="sidenote">He sings in alliterative
measures of
Beowulf’s prowess.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.36">Wisely to tell of, and words that were clever</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.37">To utter skilfully, earnestly speaking,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.38">Everything told he that he heard as to Sigmund’s</div>
<span class="sidenote">Also of Sigemund,
who has slain a
great fire-dragon.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.39">Mighty achievements, many things hidden,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.40">The strife of the Wælsing, the wide-going ventures</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.41">The children of men knew of but little,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.42">The feud and the fury, but Fitela with him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.43">When suchlike matters he minded to speak of,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.44">Uncle to nephew, as in every contention</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.45">Each to other was ever devoted:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.46">A numerous host of the race of the scathers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.47">They had slain with the sword-edge. To Sigmund accrued then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.48">No little of glory, when his life-days were over,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.49">Since he sturdy in struggle had destroyed the great dragon,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.50">The hoard-treasure’s keeper; ’neath the hoar-grayish stone he,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.51">The son of the atheling, unaided adventured</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.52">The perilous project; not present was Fitela,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.53">Yet the fortune befell him of forcing his weapon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.54">Through the marvellous dragon, that it stood in the wall,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.55">Well-honored weapon; the worm was <span class="corr" title="original: yslaughtered">slaughtered</span>.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.56">The great one had gained then by his glorious achievement</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.57">To reap from the ring-hoard richest enjoyment,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_32">[32]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.58">As best it did please him: his vessel he loaded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.59">Shining ornaments on the ship’s bosom carried,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.60">Kinsman of Wæls: the drake in heat melted.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Sigemund was
widely famed.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.61">He was farthest famed of fugitive pilgrims,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.62">Mid wide-scattered world-folk, for works of great prowess,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.63">War-troopers’ shelter: hence waxed he in honor.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XIV.FNDEF.4" id="XIV.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">Heremod, an unfortunate
Danish
king, is introduced
by way of contrast.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.64">Afterward Heremod’s hero-strength failed him,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.65">His vigor and valor. ’Mid venomous haters</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.66">To the hands of foemen he was foully delivered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.67">Offdriven early. Agony-billows</div>
<span class="sidenote">Unlike Sigemund
and Beowulf, Heremod
was a burden
to his people.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.68">Oppressed him too long, to his people he became then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.69">To all the athelings, an ever-great burden;</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.70">And the daring one’s journey in days of yore</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.71">Many wise men were wont to deplore,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.72">Such as hoped he would bring them help in their sorrow,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.73">That the son of their ruler should rise into power,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.74">Holding the headship held by his fathers,</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.75">Should govern the people, the gold-hoard and borough,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.76">The kingdom of heroes, the realm of the Scyldings.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is an
honor to his race.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.77">He to all men became then far more beloved,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.78">Higelac’s kinsman, to kindreds and races,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.79">To his friends much dearer; him malice assaulted.—</div>
<span class="sidenote">The story is resumed.</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.80">Oft running and racing on roadsters they measured</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.81">The dun-colored highways. Then the light of the morning</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.82">Was hurried and hastened. Went henchmen in numbers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.83">To the beautiful building, bold ones in spirit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.84">To look at the wonder; the liegelord himself then</div>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.85">From his wife-bower wending, warden of treasures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.86">Glorious trod with troopers unnumbered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.87">Famed for his virtues, and with him the queen-wife</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIV.88">Measured the mead-ways, with maidens attending.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> S. emends, suggesting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déop</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déog</span>,’ and removing semicolon after
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wéol</span><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>’ The two half-lines ‘welling … hid him’ would then read: <i>The
bloody deep welled with sword-gore</i>. B. accepts ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déop</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déog</span>,’ but reads
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">déað-fæges</span>’: <i>The deep boiled with the sword-gore of the death-doomed one</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Another and quite different rendering of this passage is as follows: <i>Oft
a liegeman of the king, a fame-covered man mindful of songs, who very many
ancient traditions remembered (he found other word-groups accurately bound
together) began afterward to tell of Beowulf’s adventure, skilfully to narrate
it, etc</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Might ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">guma gilp-hladen</span>’ mean ‘a man laden with boasts of the deeds
of others’?
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XIV.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XIV.FNREF.4">[4]</a> t.B. accepts B.’s ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hé þæs áron þáh</span>’ as given by H.-So., but puts a comma
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þáh</span>,’ and takes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">siððan</span>’ as introducing a dependent clause: <i>He throve
in honor since Heremod’s strength … had decreased</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XV">
<span class="pagenum" id="page_33">[33]</span>
</section></body></html>