<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.VIII">VIII.</a>HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.—<i>Continued</i>.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar responds.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.1">Hrothgar discoursed, helm of the Scyldings:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.2">“To defend our folk and to furnish assistance,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VIII.FNDEF.1" id="VIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.3">Thou soughtest us hither, good friend Beowulf.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Reminiscences of
Beowulf’s father,
Ecgtheow.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.4">The fiercest of feuds thy father engaged in,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.5">Heatholaf killed he in hand-to-hand conflict</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.6">’Mid Wilfingish warriors; then the Wederish people</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.7">For fear of a feud were forced to disown him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.8">Thence flying he fled to the folk of the South-Danes,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_18">[18]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.9">The race of the Scyldings, o’er the roll of the waters;</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.10">I had lately begun then to govern the Danemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.11">The hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.12">Rich in its jewels: dead was Heregar,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.13">My kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.14">Healfdene his bairn. He was better than I am!</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.15">That feud thereafter for a fee I compounded;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.16">O’er the weltering waters to the Wilfings I sent</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.17">Ornaments old; oaths did he swear me.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar recounts
to Beowulf the
horrors of Grendel’s
persecutions.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.18">It pains me in spirit to any to tell it,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.19">What grief in Heorot Grendel hath caused me,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.20">What horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.21">Waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.22">Weird hath offcast them to the clutches of Grendel.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.23">God can easily hinder the scather</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.24">From deeds so direful. Oft drunken with beer</div>
<span class="sidenote">My thanes have
made many boasts,
but have not executed
them.</span>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.25">O’er the ale-vessel promised warriors in armor</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.26">They would willingly wait on the wassailing-benches</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.27">A grapple with Grendel, with grimmest of edges.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.28">Then this mead-hall at morning with murder was reeking,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.29">The building was bloody at breaking of daylight,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.30">The bench-deals all flooded, dripping and bloodied,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.31">The folk-hall was gory: I had fewer retainers,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.32">Dear-beloved warriors, whom death had laid hold of.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Sit down to the
feast, and give us
comfort.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.33">Sit at the feast now, thy intents unto heroes,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VIII.FNDEF.2" id="VIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.34">Thy victor-fame show, as thy spirit doth urge thee!”</div>
<span class="sidenote">A bench is made
ready for Beowulf
and his party.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.35">For the men of the Geats then together assembled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.36">In the beer-hall blithesome a bench was made ready;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.37">There warlike in spirit they went to be seated,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.38">Proud and exultant. A liegeman did service,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_19">[19]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.39">Who a beaker embellished bore with decorum,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The gleeman sings</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.40">And gleaming-drink poured. The gleeman sang whilom</div>
<span class="sidenote">The heroes all rejoice
together.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.41">Hearty in Heorot; there was heroes’ rejoicing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VIII.42">A numerous war-band of Weders and Danemen.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="VIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#VIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. and S. reject the reading given in H.-So., and suggested by Grtvg. B.
suggests for 457-458:


<blockquote class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">
<div class="l">wáere-ryhtum Þú, wine mín Béowulf,</div>
<div class="l">and for ár-stafum úsic sóhtest.</div>
</blockquote>
<p>
This means: <i>From the obligations of clientage, my friend Beowulf, and for
assistance thou hast sought us</i>.—This gives coherence to Hrothgar’s opening
remarks in VIII., and also introduces a new motive for Beowulf’s coming to
Hrothgar’s aid.
</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#VIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> <i>Sit now at the feast, and disclose thy purposes to the victorious heroes, as
thy spirit urges</i>.—Kl. reaches the above translation by erasing the comma
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">meoto</span>’ and reading ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sige-hrèðsecgum</span>.’—There are other and bolder
emendations and suggestions. Of these the boldest is to regard ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">meoto</span>’ as a
verb (imperative), and read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on sæl</span>’: <i>Think upon gayety, etc</i>.—All the renderings
are unsatisfactory, the one given in our translation involving a zeugma.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="IX">
</section></body></html>