<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.X">X.</a>BEOWULF SILENCES UNFERTH.—GLEE IS HIGH.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.X.1">“So ill-meaning enemies often did cause me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.2">Sorrow the sorest. I served them, in quittance,</div>
<span class="sidenote">My dear sword
always served me
faithfully.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.3">With my dear-lovèd sword, as in sooth it was fitting;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.4">They missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.5">Ill-doers evil, of eating my body,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.6">Of surrounding the banquet deep in the ocean;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.7">But wounded with edges early at morning</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.8">They were stretched a-high on the strand of the ocean,</div>
<span class="sidenote">I put a stop to the
outrages of the sea-monsters.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.9">Put to sleep with the sword, that sea-going travelers</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.10">No longer thereafter were hindered from sailing</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.11">The foam-dashing currents. Came a light from the east,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.12">God’s beautiful beacon; the billows subsided,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.13">That well I could see the nesses projecting,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Fortune helps the
brave earl.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.14">The blustering crags. Weird often saveth</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.15">The undoomed hero if doughty his valor!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.16">But me did it fortune<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#X.FNDEF.1" id="X.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> to fell with my weapon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.17">Nine of the nickers. Of night-struggle harder</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.18">’Neath dome of the heaven heard I but rarely,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.19">Nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean;</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.20">Yet I ’scaped with my life the grip of the monsters,</div>
<span class="sidenote">After that escape I
drifted to Finland.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.21">Weary from travel. Then the waters bare me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.22">To the land of the Finns, the flood with the current,</div>
<span class="sidenote">I have never heard
of your doing any
such bold deeds.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.23">The weltering waves. Not a word hath been told me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.24">Of deeds so daring done by thee, Unferth,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.25">And of sword-terror none; never hath Breca</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.26">At the play of the battle, nor either of you two,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.27">Feat so fearless performèd with weapons</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.28">Glinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_22">[22]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.29">. . . . . . . . . . . . I utter no boasting;</div>
<span class="sidenote">You are a slayer of
brothers, and will
suffer damnation,
wise as you may
be.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.30">Though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.31">Thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell get</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.32">Direful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.33">I tell thee in earnest, offspring of Ecglaf,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.34">Never had Grendel such numberless horrors,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.35">The direful demon, done to thy liegelord,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.36">Harrying in Heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Had your acts been
as brave as your
words, Grendel had
not ravaged your
land so long.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.37">Thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.38">He hath found out fully that the fierce-burning hatred,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.39">The edge-battle eager, of all of your kindred,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.40">Of the Victory-Scyldings, need little dismay him:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.41">Oaths he exacteth, not any he spares</div>
<span class="sidenote">The monster is not
afraid of the Danes,</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.42">Of the folk of the Danemen, but fighteth with pleasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.43">Killeth and feasteth, no contest expecteth</div>
<span class="sidenote">but he will soon
learn to dread the
Geats.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.44">From Spear-Danish people. But the prowess and valor</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.45">Of the earls of the Geatmen early shall venture</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.46">To give him a grapple. He shall go who is able</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.47">Bravely to banquet, when the bright-light of morning</div>
<span class="sidenote">On the second day,
any warrior may
go unmolested to
the mead-banquet.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.48">Which the second day bringeth, the sun in its ether-robes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.49">O’er children of men shines from the southward!”</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.50">Then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasure</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar’s spirits
are revived.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.51">Was blithesome and joyous, the Bright-Danish ruler</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.52">Expected assistance; the people’s protector</div>
<span class="sidenote">The old king trusts
Beowulf.
The heroes are
joyful.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.53">Heard from Beowulf his bold resolution.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.54">There was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.55">The words were winsome. Wealhtheow advanced then,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Wealhtheow
plays the
hostess.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.56">Consort of Hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.57">Gold-decked saluted the men in the building,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.58">And the freeborn woman the beaker presented</div>
<span class="sidenote">She offers the cup
to her husband
first.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.59">To the lord of the kingdom, first of the East-Danes,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.60">Bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.61">Lief to his liegemen; he lustily tasted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.62">Of banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.63">The Helmingish lady then graciously circled</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.64">’Mid all the liegemen lesser and greater:</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_23">[23]</span>
<span class="sidenote">She gives presents
to the heroes.</span>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.65">Treasure-cups tendered, till time was afforded</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.66">That the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queen</div>
<span class="sidenote">Then she offers the
cup to Beowulf,
thanking God that
aid has come.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.67">Might bear to Beowulf the bumper o’errunning;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.68">She greeted the Geat-prince, God she did thank,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.69">Most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.70">That in any of earlmen she ever should look for</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.71">Solace in sorrow. He accepted the beaker,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.72">Battle-bold warrior, at Wealhtheow’s giving,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf states to
the queen the object
of his visit.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.73">Then equipped for combat quoth he in measures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.74">Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.75">“I purposed in spirit when I mounted the ocean,</div>
<span class="sidenote">I determined to do
or die.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.76">When I boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.77">I would work to the fullest the will of your people</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.78">Or in foe’s-clutches fastened fall in the battle.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.79">Deeds I shall do of daring and prowess,</div>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.80">Or the last of my life-days live in this mead-hall.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.81">These words to the lady were welcome and pleasing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.82">The boast of the Geatman; with gold trappings broidered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.83">Went the freeborn folk-queen her fond-lord to sit by.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Glee is high.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.84">Then again as of yore was heard in the building</div>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.85">Courtly discussion, conquerors’ shouting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.86">Heroes were happy, till Healfdene’s son would</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.87">Go to his slumber to seek for refreshing;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.88">For the horrid hell-monster in the hall-building knew he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.89">A fight was determined,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#X.FNDEF.2" id="X.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> since the light of the sun they</div>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.90">No longer could see, and lowering darkness</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.91">O’er all had descended, and dark under heaven</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.92">Shadowy shapes came shying around them.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar retires,
leaving Beowulf in
charge of the hall.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.93">The liegemen all rose then. One saluted the other,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.94">Hrothgar Beowulf, in rhythmical measures,</div>
<span class="linenum">95</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.95">Wishing him well, and, the wassail-hall giving</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.96">To his care and keeping, quoth he departing:</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_24">[24]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.97">“Not to any one else have I ever entrusted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.98">But thee and thee only, the hall of the Danemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.99">Since high I could heave my hand and my buckler.</div>
<span class="linenum">100</span>
<div class="l" id="L.X.100">Take thou in charge now the noblest of houses;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.101">Be mindful of honor, exhibiting prowess,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.102">Watch ’gainst the foeman! Thou shalt want no enjoyments,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.X.103">Survive thou safely adventure so glorious!”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="X.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#X.FNREF.1">[1]</a> The repetition of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwæðere</span>’ (574 and 578) is regarded by some scholars
as a defect. B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swá Þær</span>’ for the first: <i>So there it befell me, etc.</i>
Another suggestion is to change the second ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwæðere</span>’ into ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swá Þær</span>’: <i>So
there I escaped with my life, etc.</i>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="X.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#X.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Kl. suggests a period after ‘determined.’ This would give the passage
as follows: <i>Since they no longer could see the light of the sun, and lowering
darkness was down over all, dire under the heavens shadowy beings came going
around them</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XI">
</section></body></html>