<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
<h2>
<span>II.</span>
<span>SCYLD’S SUCCESSORS.—HROTHGAR’S GREAT MEAD-HALL.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.II.1">In the boroughs then Beowulf, bairn of the Scyldings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.2">Belovèd land-prince, for long-lasting season</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.3">Was famed mid the folk (his father departed,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.4">The prince from his dwelling), till afterward sprang</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.5">Great-minded Healfdene; the Danes in his lifetime</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.6">He graciously governed, grim-mooded, agèd.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.7">Four bairns of his body born in succession</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.8">Woke in the world, war-troopers’ leader</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.9">Heorogar, Hrothgar, and Halga the good;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.10">Heard I that Elan was Ongentheow’s consort,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.11">The well-beloved bedmate of the War-Scylfing leader.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.12">Then glory in battle to Hrothgar was given,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.13">Waxing of war-fame, that willingly kinsmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.14">Obeyed his bidding, till the boys grew to manhood,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.15">A numerous band.  It burned in his spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.16">To urge his folk to found a great building,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.17">A mead-hall grander than men of the era</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.18">Ever had heard of, and in it to share</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.19">With young and old all of the blessings</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.20">The Lord had allowed him, save life and retainers.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.21">Then the work I find afar was assigned</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.22">To many races in middle-earth’s regions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.23">To adorn the great folk-hall. In due time it happened</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.24">Early ’mong men, that ’twas finished entirely,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.25">The greatest of hall-buildings; Heorot he named it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.26">Who wide-reaching word-sway wielded ’mong earlmen.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.27">His promise he brake not, rings he lavished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.28">Treasure at banquet.  Towered the hall up</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.29">High and horn-crested, huge between antlers:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.30">It battle-waves bided, the blasting fire-demon;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.31">Ere long then from hottest hatred must sword-wrath</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.32">Arise for a woman’s husband and father.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.33">Then the mighty war-spirit endured for a season,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.34">Bore it bitterly, he who bided in darkness,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.35">That light-hearted laughter loud in the building</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.36">Greeted him daily; there was dulcet harp-music,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.37">Clear song of the singer.  He said that was able</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.38">To tell from of old earthmen’s beginnings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.39">That Father Almighty earth had created,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.40">The winsome wold that the water encircleth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.41">Set exultingly the sun’s and the moon’s beams</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.42">To lavish their lustre on land-folk and races,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.43">And earth He embellished in all her regions</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.44">With limbs and leaves; life He bestowed too</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.45">On all the kindreds that live under heaven.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.46">So blessed with abundance, brimming with joyance,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.47">The warriors abided, till a certain one gan to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.48">Dog them with deeds of direfullest malice,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.49">A foe in the hall-building: this horrible stranger</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.50">Was Grendel entitled, the march-stepper famous</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.51">Who dwelt in the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.52">The wan-mooded being abode for a season</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.53">In the land of the giants, when the Lord and Creator</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.54">Had banned him and branded. For that bitter murder,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.55">The killing of Abel, all-ruling Father</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.56">The kindred of Cain crushed with His vengeance;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.57">In the feud He rejoiced not, but far away drove him</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.58">From kindred and kind, that crime to atone for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.59">Meter of Justice. Thence ill-favored creatures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.60">Elves and giants, monsters of ocean,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.61">Came into being, and the giants that longtime</div>
<div class="l" id="L.II.62">Grappled with God; He gave them requital.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>