<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 42</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-42" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XLII">XLII.</a>WIGLAF’S SAD STORY.—THE HOARD CARRIED OFF.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.1">Then ’twas seen that the journey prospered him little</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.2">Who wrongly within had the ornaments hidden<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.1" id="XLII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.3">Down ’neath the wall. The warden erst slaughtered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.4">Some few of the folk-troop: the feud then thereafter</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.5">Was hotly avengèd. ’Tis a wonder where,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.2" id="XLII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.6">When the strength-famous trooper has attained to the end of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.7">Life-days allotted, then no longer the man may</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.8">Remain with his kinsmen where mead-cups are flowing.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.9">So to Beowulf happened when the ward of the barrow,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.10">Assaults, he sought for: himself had no knowledge</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.11">How his leaving this life was likely to happen.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.12">So to doomsday, famous folk-leaders down did</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.13">Call it with curses—who ’complished it there—</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_104">[104]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.14">That that man should be ever of ill-deeds convicted,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.15">Confined in foul-places, fastened in hell-bonds,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.16">Punished with plagues, who this place should e’er ravage.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.3" id="XLII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.17">He cared not for gold: rather the Wielder’s</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.18">Favor preferred he first to get sight of.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.4" id="XLII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf addresses
his comrades.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.19">Wiglaf discoursed then, Wihstan his son:</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.20">“Oft many an earlman on one man’s account must</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.21">Sorrow endure, as to us it hath happened.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.22">The liegelord belovèd we could little prevail on,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.23">Kingdom’s keeper, counsel to follow,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.24">Not to go to the guardian of the gold-hoard, but let him</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.25">Lie where he long was, live in his dwelling</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.26">Till the end of the world. Met we a destiny</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.27">Hard to endure: the hoard has been looked at,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.28">Been gained very grimly; too grievous the fate that<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.5" id="XLII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.29">The prince of the people pricked to come thither.</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.30"><i>I</i> was therein and all of it looked at,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.31">The building’s equipments, since access was given me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.32">Not kindly at all entrance permitted</div>
<span class="sidenote">He tells them of
Beowulf’s last
moments.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.33">Within under earth-wall. Hastily seized I</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.34">And held in my hands a huge-weighing burden</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.35">Of hoard-treasures costly, hither out bare them</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.36">To my liegelord belovèd: life was yet in him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.37">And consciousness also; the old one discoursed then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.38">Much and mournfully, commanded to greet you,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s dying
request.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.39">Bade that remembering the deeds of your friend-lord</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.40">Ye build on the fire-hill of corpses a lofty</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.41">Burial-barrow, broad and far-famous,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.42">As ’mid world-dwelling warriors he was widely most honored</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.43">While he reveled in riches. Let us rouse us and hasten</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_105">[105]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.44">Again to see and seek for the treasure,</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.45">The wonder ’neath wall. The way I will show you,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.46">That close ye may look at ring-gems sufficient</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.47">And gold in abundance. Let the bier with promptness</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.48">Fully be fashioned, when forth we shall come,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.49">And lift we our lord, then, where long he shall tarry,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.50">Well-beloved warrior, ’neath the Wielder’s protection.”</div>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf charges
them to build a
funeral-pyre.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.51">Then the son of Wihstan bade orders be given,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.52">Mood-valiant man, to many of heroes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.53">Holders of homesteads, that they hither from far,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.54"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.6" id="XLII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup>Leaders of liegemen, should look for the good one</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.55">With wood for his pyre: “The flame shall now swallow</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.56">(The wan fire shall wax<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XLII.FNDEF.7" id="XLII.FNREF.7">7</a></sup>) the warriors’ leader</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.57">Who the rain of the iron often abided,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.58">When, sturdily hurled, the storm of the arrows</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.59">Leapt o’er linden-wall, the lance rendered service,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.60">Furnished with feathers followed the arrow.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.61">Now the wise-mooded son of Wihstan did summon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.62">The best of the braves from the band of the ruler</div>
<span class="sidenote">He takes seven
thanes, and enters
the den.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.63">Seven together; ’neath the enemy’s roof he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.64">Went with the seven; one of the heroes</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.65">Who fared at the front, a fire-blazing torch-light</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.66">Bare in his hand. No lot then decided</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.67">Who that hoard should havoc, when hero-earls saw it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.68">Lying in the cavern uncared-for entirely,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.69">Rusting to ruin: they rued then but little</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.70">That they hastily hence hauled out the treasure,</div>
<span class="sidenote">They push the
dragon over the
wall.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.71">The dear-valued jewels; the dragon eke pushed they,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.72">The worm o’er the wall, let the wave-currents take him,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_106">[106]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.73">The waters enwind the ward of the treasures.</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hoard is laid
on a wain.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.74">There wounden gold on a wain was uploaded,</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.75">A mass unmeasured, the men-leader off then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLII.76">The hero hoary, to Whale’s-Ness was carried.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehýdde</span>,’ B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gehýðde</span>’: the passage would stand as above
except the change of ‘hidden’ (v. 2) to ‘plundered.’ The reference, however,
would be to the thief, not to the dragon.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The passage ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Wundur … búan</span>’ (3063-3066), M. took to be a question
asking whether it was strange that a man should die when his appointed time
had come.—B. sees a corruption, and makes emendations introducing the
idea that a brave man should not die from sickness or from old age, but should
find death in the performance of some deed of daring.—S. sees an indirect
question introduced by ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hwár</span>’ and dependent upon ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wundur</span>’: <i>A secret is it
when the hero is to die, etc</i>.—Why may the two clauses not be parallel, and
the whole passage an Old English cry of ‘<i>How wonderful is death!’?</i>—S.’s
is the best yet offered, if ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wundor</span>’ means ‘mystery.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">strude</span>’ in H.-So., S. suggests ‘stride.’ This would require ‘ravage’
(v. 16) to be changed to ‘tread.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> ‘He cared … sight of’ (17, 18), S. emends so as to read as follows:
<i>He (Beowulf) had not before seen the favor of the avaricious possessor.</i>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> B. renders: <i>That which drew the king thither</i> (i.e. <i>the treasure</i>) <i>was
granted us, but in such a way that it overcomes us.</i>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Folc-ágende</span>’ (3114) B. takes as dat. sing. with ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gódum</span>,’ and refers it to
Beowulf; that is, <i>Should bring fire-wood to the place where the good folk-ruler
lay</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XLII.FNDEF.7">
<a href="#XLII.FNREF.7">[7]</a> C. proposes to take ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">weaxan</span>’ = L. ‘<span class="la" lang="la" xml:lang="la">vescor</span>,’ and translate <i>devour</i>. This
gives a parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fretan</span>’ above. The parenthesis would be discarded and
the passage read: <i>Now shall the fire consume, the wan-flame devour, the
prince of warriors, etc</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XLIII">
</section></body></html>