<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.IV">IV.</a>BEOWULF GOES TO HROTHGAR’S ASSISTANCE.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar sees no
way of escape from
the persecutions of
Grendel.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.1">So Healfdene’s kinsman constantly mused on</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.2">His long-lasting sorrow; the battle-thane clever</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.3">Was not anywise able evils to ’scape from:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.4">Too crushing the sorrow that came to the people,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.5">Loathsome and lasting the life-grinding torture,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf, the Geat,
hero of the poem,
hears of Hrothgar’s
sorrow, and resolves
to go to his
assistance.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.6">Greatest of night-woes. So Higelac’s liegeman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.7">Good amid Geatmen, of Grendel’s achievements</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.8">Heard in his home:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.1" id="IV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> of heroes then living</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.9">He was stoutest and strongest, sturdy and noble.</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.10">He bade them prepare him a bark that was trusty;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.11">He said he the war-king would seek o’er the ocean,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.12">The folk-leader noble, since he needed retainers.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.13">For the perilous project prudent companions</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.14">Chided him little, though loving him dearly;</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.15">They egged the brave atheling, augured him glory.</div>
<span class="sidenote">With fourteen carefully
chosen companions,
he sets out
for Dane-land.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.16">The excellent knight from the folk of the Geatmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.17">Had liegemen selected, likest to prove them</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.18">Trustworthy warriors; with fourteen companions</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.19">The vessel he looked for; a liegeman then showed them,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.20">A sea-crafty man, the bounds of the country.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.21">Fast the days fleeted; the float was a-water,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.22">The craft by the cliff. Clomb to the prow then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.23">Well-equipped warriors: the wave-currents twisted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.24">The sea on the sand; soldiers then carried</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.25">On the breast of the vessel bright-shining jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.26">Handsome war-armor; heroes outshoved then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.27">Warmen the wood-ship, on its wished-for adventure.</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_9">[9]</span>
<span class="sidenote">The vessel sails
like a bird</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.28">The foamy-necked floater fanned by the breeze,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.29">Likest a bird, glided the waters,</div>
<span class="sidenote">In twenty four
hours they reach
the shores of
Hrothgar’s dominions</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.30">Till twenty and four hours thereafter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.31">The twist-stemmed vessel had traveled such distance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.32">That the sailing-men saw the sloping embankments,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.33">The sea cliffs gleaming, precipitous mountains,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.34">Nesses enormous<span class="add" title="Added">:</span> they were nearing the limits</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.35">At the end of the ocean.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.2" id="IV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> Up thence quickly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.36">The men of the Weders clomb to the mainland,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.37">Fastened their vessel (battle weeds rattled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.38">War burnies clattered), the Wielder they thanked</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.39">That the ways o’er the waters had waxen so gentle.</div>
<span class="sidenote">They are hailed by
the Danish coast
guard</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.40">Then well from the cliff edge the guard of the Scyldings</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.41">Who the sea-cliffs should see to, saw o’er the gangway</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.42">Brave ones bearing beauteous targets,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.43">Armor all ready, anxiously thought he,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.44">Musing and wondering what men were approaching.</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.45">High on his horse then Hrothgar’s retainer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.46">Turned him to coastward, mightily brandished</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.47">His lance in his hands, questioned with boldness.</div>
<span class="sidenote">His challenge</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.48">“Who are ye men here, mail-covered warriors</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.49">Clad in your corslets, come thus a-driving</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.50">A high riding ship o’er the shoals of the waters,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.51"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.3" id="IV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup>And hither ’neath helmets have hied o’er the ocean?</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_10">[10]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.52">I have been strand-guard, standing as warden,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.53">Lest enemies ever anywise ravage</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.54">Danish dominions with army of war-ships.</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.55">More boldly never have warriors ventured</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.56">Hither to come; of kinsmen’s approval,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.57">Word-leave of warriors, I ween that ye surely</div>
<span class="sidenote">He is struck by
Beowulf’s appearance.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.58">Nothing have known. Never a greater one</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.59">Of earls o’er the earth have <i>I</i> had a sight of</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.60">Than is one of your number, a hero in armor;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.61">No low-ranking fellow<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#IV.FNDEF.4" id="IV.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> adorned with his weapons,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.62">But launching them little, unless looks are deceiving,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.63">And striking appearance. Ere ye pass on your journey</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.64">As treacherous spies to the land of the Scyldings</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.65">And farther fare, I fully must know now</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.66">What race ye belong to. Ye far-away dwellers,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.67">Sea-faring sailors, my simple opinion</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.68">Hear ye and hearken: haste is most fitting</div>
<div class="l" id="L.IV.69">Plainly to tell me what place ye are come from.”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">From hám</span>’  (194) is much disputed. One rendering is: <i>Beowulf, being
away from home, heard of Hrothgar’s troubles, etc</i>. Another, that adopted by
S. and endorsed in the H.-So. notes, is: <i>B. heard from his neighborhood (neighbors),</i>
i.e. <i>in his home, etc</i>. A third is: <i>B., being at home, heard this as
occurring away from home</i>. The H.-So. glossary and notes conflict.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Eoletes</span>’ (224) is marked with a (?) by H<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>-So<span class="add" title="Added">.;</span> our rendering simply
follows his conjecture<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>—Other conjectures as to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eolet</span>’ are<span class="add" title="Added">:</span> (1) <i>voyage</i>,
(2) <i>toil</i>, <i>labor</i>, (3) <i>hasty journey</i><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> The lacuna of the MS at this point has been supplied by various conjectures<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
The reading adopted by H<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>-So<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> has been rendered in the above translation<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
W<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>, like H<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>-So<span class="add" title="Added">.,</span> makes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ic</span>’ the beginning of a new sentence, but, for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">helmas
bæron</span>,’ he reads ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hringed stefnan<span class="add" title="Added">.’</span></span> This has the advantage of giving a
parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">brontne ceol</span>’ instead of a kenning for ‘go<span class="add" title="Added">.</span>’—B puts the (?)
after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">holmas</span>’, and begins a new sentence at the middle of the line<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> Translate<span class="add" title="Added">:</span>
<i>What warriors are ye, clad in armor, who have thus come bringing the
foaming vessel over the water way, hither over the seas? For some time on
the wall I have been coast guard, etc</i>. S<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> endorses most of what B<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> says, but
leaves out ‘on the wall’ in the last sentence. If W.’s ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hringed stefnan</span>’ be
accepted, change <a href="#L.IV.51">line 51</a> above to, <i>A ring-stemmed vessel hither o’ersea</i><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="IV.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#IV.FNREF.4">[4]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Seld-guma</span>’ (249) is variously rendered: (1) <i>housecarle</i>; (2) <i>home-stayer</i>;
(3) <i>common man</i>. Dr. H. Wood suggests <i>a man-at-arms in another’s house</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="V">
</section></body></html>