<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 43</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XLIII">XLIII.</a>THE BURNING OF BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s pyre.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.1">The folk of the Geatmen got him then ready</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.2">A pile on the earth strong for the burning,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.3">Behung with helmets, hero-knights’ targets,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.4">And bright-shining burnies, as he begged they should have them;</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.5">Then wailing war-heroes their world-famous chieftain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.6">Their liegelord beloved, laid in the middle.</div>
<span class="sidenote">The funeral-flame.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.7">Soldiers began then to make on the barrow</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.8">The largest of dead-fires: dark o’er the vapor</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.9">The smoke-cloud ascended, the sad-roaring fire,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.10">Mingled with weeping (the wind-roar subsided)</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.11">Till the building of bone it had broken to pieces,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.12">Hot in the heart. Heavy in spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.13">They mood-sad lamented the men-leader’s ruin;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.14">And mournful measures the much-grieving widow</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.15">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.16">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.17">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.18">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.19">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.20">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<span class="sidenote">The Weders carry
out their lord’s last
request.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.21">The men of the Weders made accordingly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.22">A hill on the height, high and extensive,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.23">Of sea-going sailors to be seen from a distance,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.24">And the brave one’s beacon built where the fire was,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.25">In ten-days’ space, with a wall surrounded it,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.26">As wisest of world-folk could most worthily plan it.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.27">They placed in the barrow rings and jewels,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_107">[107]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Rings and gems
are laid in the
barrow.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.28">All such ornaments as erst in the treasure</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.29">War-mooded men had won in possession:</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.30">The earnings of earlmen to earth they entrusted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.31">The gold to the dust, where yet it remaineth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.32">As useless to mortals as in foregoing eras.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.33">’Round the dead-mound rode then the doughty-in-battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.34">Bairns of all twelve of the chiefs of the people,</div>
<span class="sidenote">They mourn for
their lord, and sing
his praises.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.35">More would they mourn, lament for their ruler,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.36">Speak in measure, mention him with pleasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.37">Weighed his worth, and his warlike achievements</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.38">Mightily commended, as ’tis meet one praise his</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.39">Liegelord in words and love him in spirit,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.40">When forth from his body he fares to destruction.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.41">So lamented mourning the men of the Geats,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.42">Fond-loving vassals, the fall of their lord,</div>
<span class="sidenote">An ideal king.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.43">Said he was kindest of kings under heaven,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.44">Gentlest of men, most winning of manner,</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XLIII.45">Friendliest to folk-troops and fondest of honor.</div>
</section></body></html>