<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 29</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXIX">XXIX.</a>BEOWULF AND HIGELAC.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.1">Then the brave one departed, his band along with him,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf and his
party seek Higelac.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.2">Seeking the sea-shore, the sea-marches treading,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.3">The wide-stretching shores. The world-candle glimmered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.4">The sun from the southward; they proceeded then onward,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.5">Early arriving where they heard that the troop-lord,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.6">Ongentheow’s slayer, excellent, youthful</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.7">Folk-prince and warrior was distributing jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.8">Close in his castle. The coming of Beowulf</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.9">Was announced in a message quickly to Higelac,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.10">That the folk-troop’s defender forth to the palace</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.11">The linden-companion alive was advancing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.12">Secure from the combat courtward a-going.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.13">The building was early inward made ready</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.14">For the foot-going guests as the good one had ordered.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf sits by his
liegelord.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.15">He sat by the man then who had lived through the struggle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.16">Kinsman by kinsman, when the king of the people</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.17">Had in lordly language saluted the dear one,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Hygd receives
the heroes.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.18">In words that were formal. The daughter of Hæreth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.19">Coursed through the building, carrying mead-cups:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.1" id="XXIX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_68">[68]</span>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.20">She loved the retainers, tendered the beakers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.21">To the high-minded Geatmen. Higelac ’gan then</div>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac is greatly
interested in Beowulf’s
adventures.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.22">Pleasantly plying his companion with questions</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.23">In the high-towering palace. A curious interest</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.24">Tormented his spirit, what meaning to see in</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.25">The Sea-Geats’ adventures: “Beowulf worthy,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Give an account of
thy adventures,
Beowulf dear.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.26">How throve your journeying, when thou thoughtest suddenly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.27">Far o’er the salt-streams to seek an encounter,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.28">A battle at Heorot? Hast bettered for Hrothgar,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.29">The famous folk-leader, his far-published sorrows</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.30">Any at all? In agony-billows</div>
<span class="sidenote">My suspense has
been great.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.31">I mused upon torture, distrusted the journey</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.32">Of the belovèd liegeman; I long time did pray thee</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.33">By no means to seek out the murderous spirit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.34">To suffer the South-Danes themselves to decide on<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.2" id="XXIX.FNREF.2" title="See my note to 1599, supra, and B. in P. and B. XII. 97.">2</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.35">Grappling with Grendel. To God I am thankful</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.36">To be suffered to see thee safe from thy journey.”</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf narrates
his adventures.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.37">Beowulf answered, bairn of old Ecgtheow:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.38">“’Tis hidden by no means, Higelac chieftain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.39">From many of men, the meeting so famous,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.40">What mournful moments of me and of Grendel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.41">Were passed in the place where he pressing affliction</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.42">On the Victory-Scyldings scathefully brought,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.43">Anguish forever; that all I avengèd,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.44">So that any under heaven of the kinsmen of Grendel</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s kindred
have no cause to
boast.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.45">Needeth not boast of that cry-in-the-morning,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.46">Who longest liveth of the loth-going kindred,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.3" id="XXIX.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.47">Encompassed by moorland. I came in my journey</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.48">To the royal ring-hall, Hrothgar to greet there:</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar received
me very cordially.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.49">Soon did the famous scion of Healfdene,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.50">When he understood fully the spirit that led me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.51">Assign me a seat with the son of his bosom.</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_69">[69]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.52">The troop was in joyance; mead-glee greater</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.53">’Neath arch of the ether not ever beheld I</div>
<span class="sidenote">The queen also
showed up no little
honor.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.54">’Mid hall-building holders. The highly-famed queen,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.55">Peace-tie of peoples, oft passed through the building,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.56">Cheered the young troopers; she oft tendered a hero</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.57">A beautiful ring-band, ere she went to her sitting.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar’s lovely
daughter.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.58">Oft the daughter of Hrothgar in view of the courtiers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.59">To the earls at the end the ale-vessel carried,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.60">Whom Freaware I heard then hall-sitters title,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.61">When nail-adorned jewels she gave to the heroes:</div>
<span class="sidenote">She is betrothed to
Ingeld, in order to
unite the Danes
and Heathobards.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.62">Gold-bedecked, youthful, to the glad son of Froda</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.63">Her faith has been plighted; the friend of the Scyldings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.64">The guard of the kingdom, hath given his sanction,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.4" id="XXIX.FNREF.4" title="See note to v. 1599 above.">4</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.65">And counts it a vantage, for a part of the quarrels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.66">A portion of hatred, to pay with the woman.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.67"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIX.FNDEF.5" id="XXIX.FNREF.5">5</a></sup>Somewhere not rarely, when the ruler has fallen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.68">The life-taking lance relaxeth its fury</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIX.69">For a brief breathing-spell, though the bride be charming!</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Meodu-scencum</span>’ (1981) some would render ‘<i>with mead-pourers</i>.’ Translate
then: <i>The daughter of Hæreth went through the building accompanied by
mead-pourers</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> See my note to <a href="#L.XXIV.41">1599</a>, supra, and B. in P. and B. XII. 97.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fenne</span>,’ supplied by Grdtvg., B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fácne</span>’ (cf. Jul. 350).
Accepting this, translate: <i>Who longest lives of the hated race, steeped in
treachery</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.4">[4]</a> See note to <a href="#L.XXIV.41">v. 1599</a> above.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIX.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XXIX.FNREF.5">[5]</a> This is perhaps the least understood sentence in the poem, almost every
word being open to dispute. (1) The ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">nó</span>’ of our text is an emendation, and
is rejected by many scholars. (2) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Seldan</span>’ is by some taken as an adv.
(= <i>seldom</i>), and by others as a noun (= <i>page</i>, <i>companion</i>). (3) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Léod-hryre</span>,’
some render ‘<i>fall of the people</i>’; others, ‘<i>fall of the prince</i>.’ (4) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Búgeð</span>,’
most scholars regard as the intrans. verb meaning ‘<i>bend</i>,’ ‘<i>rest</i>’; but one
great scholar has translated it ‘<i>shall kill</i>.’ (5) ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Hwær</span>,’ Very recently, has
been attacked, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wære</span>’ being suggested. (6) As a corollary to the above,
the same critic proposes to drop ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">oft</span>’ out of the text.—t.B. suggests: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Oft
seldan wære</span> after <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">léodhryre</span>: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">lýtle hwíle bongár búgeð, þéah séo brýd duge</span>
= <i>often has a treaty been (thus) struck, after a prince had fallen: (but only)
a short time is the spear (then) wont to rest, however excellent the bride may be</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXX">
</section></body></html>