<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
<span>XXII.</span>
<span>BEOWULF SEEKS GRENDEL’S MOTHER.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.1">Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow’s son:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.2">“Grieve not, O wise one! for each it is better,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.3">His friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.4">Each of us must the end-day abide of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.5">His earthly existence; who is able accomplish</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.6">Glory ere death! To battle-thane noble</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.7">Lifeless lying, ’tis at last most fitting.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.8">Arise, O king, quick let us hasten</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.9">To look at the footprint of the kinsman of Grendel!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.10">I promise thee this now: to his place he’ll escape not,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.11">To embrace of the earth, nor to mountainous forest,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.12">Nor to depths of the ocean, wherever he wanders.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.13">Practice thou now patient endurance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.14">Of each of thy sorrows, as I hope for thee soothly!”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.15">Then up sprang the old one, the All-Wielder thanked he,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.16">Ruler Almighty, that the man had outspoken.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.17">Then for Hrothgar a war-horse was decked with a bridle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.18">Curly-maned courser. The clever folk-leader</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.19">Stately proceeded: stepped then an earl-troop</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.20">Of linden-wood bearers. Her footprints were seen then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.21">Widely in wood-paths, her way o’er the bottoms,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.22">Where she faraway fared o’er fen-country murky,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.23">Bore away breathless the best of retainers</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.24">Who pondered with Hrothgar the welfare of country.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.25">The son of the athelings then went o’er the stony,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.26">Declivitous cliffs, the close-covered passes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.27">Narrow passages, paths unfrequented,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.28">Nesses abrupt, nicker-haunts many;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.29">One of a few of wise-mooded heroes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.30">He onward advanced to view the surroundings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.31">Till he found unawares woods of the mountain</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.32">O’er hoar-stones hanging, holt-wood unjoyful;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.33">The water stood under, welling and gory.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.34">’Twas irksome in spirit to all of the Danemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.35">Friends of the Scyldings, to many a liegeman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.36">Sad to be suffered, a sorrow unlittle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.37">To each of the earlmen, when to Æschere’s head they</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.38">Came on the cliff. The current was seething</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.39">With blood and with gore (the troopers gazed on it).</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.40">The horn anon sang the battle-song ready.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.41">The troop were all seated; they saw ’long the water then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.42">Many a serpent, mere-dragons wondrous</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.43">Trying the waters, nickers a-lying</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.44">On the cliffs of the nesses, which at noonday full often</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.45">Go on the sea-deeps their sorrowful journey,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.46">Wild-beasts and wormkind; away then they hastened</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.47">Hot-mooded, hateful, they heard the great clamor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.48">The war-trumpet winding. One did the Geat-prince</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.49">Sunder from earth-joys, with arrow from bowstring,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.50">From his sea-struggle tore him, that the trusty war-missile</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.51">Pierced to his vitals; he proved in the currents</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.52">Less doughty at swimming whom death had offcarried.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.53">Soon in the waters the wonderful swimmer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.54">Was straitened most sorely with sword-pointed boar-spears,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.55">Pressed in the battle and pulled to the cliff-edge;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.56">The liegemen then looked on the loath-fashioned stranger.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.57">Beowulf donned then his battle-equipments,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.58">Cared little for life; inlaid and most ample,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.59">The hand-woven corslet which could cover his body,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.60">Must the wave-deeps explore, that war might be powerless</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.61">To harm the great hero, and the hating one’s grasp might</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.62">Not peril his safety; his head was protected</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.63">By the light-flashing helmet that should mix with the bottoms,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.64">Trying the eddies, treasure-emblazoned,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.65">Encircled with jewels, as in seasons long past</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.66">The weapon-smith worked it, wondrously made it,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.67">With swine-bodies fashioned it, that thenceforward no longer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.68">Brand might bite it, and battle-sword hurt it.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.69">And that was not least of helpers in prowess</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.70">That Hrothgar’s spokesman had lent him when straitened;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.71">And the hilted hand-sword was Hrunting entitled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.72">Old and most excellent ’mong all of the treasures;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.73">Its blade was of iron, blotted with poison,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.74">Hardened with gore; it failed not in battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.75">Any hero under heaven in hand who it brandished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.76">Who ventured to take the terrible journeys,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.77">The battle-field sought; not the earliest occasion</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.78">That deeds of daring ’twas destined to ’complish.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.79">Ecglaf’s kinsman minded not soothly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.80">Exulting in strength, what erst he had spoken</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.81">Drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.82">A sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.83">’Neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.84">To fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.85">Repute for his strength. Not so with the other</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXII.86">When he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>