<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
<span>XIII.</span>
<span>GRENDEL IS VANQUISHED.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.1">For no cause whatever would the earlmen’s defender</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.2">Leave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.3">He deemed his existence utterly useless</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.4">To men under heaven. Many a noble</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.5">Of Beowulf brandished his battle-sword old,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.6">Would guard the life of his lord and protector,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.7">The far-famous chieftain, if able to do so;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.8">While waging the warfare, this wist they but little,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.9">Brave battle-thanes, while his body intending</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.10">To slit into slivers, and seeking his spirit:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.11">That the relentless foeman nor finest of weapons</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.12">Of all on the earth, nor any of war-bills</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.13">Was willing to injure; but weapons of victory</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.14">Swords and suchlike he had sworn to dispense with.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.15">His death at that time must prove to be wretched,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.16">And the far-away spirit widely should journey</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.17">Into enemies’ power. This plainly he saw then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.18">Who with mirth of mood malice no little</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.19">Had wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.20">(To God he was hostile), that his body would fail him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.21">But Higelac’s hardy henchman and kinsman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.22">Held him by the hand; hateful to other</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.23">Was each one if living. A body-wound suffered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.24">The direful demon, damage incurable</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.25">Was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.26">His body did burst. To Beowulf was given</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.27">Glory in battle; Grendel from thenceward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.28">Must flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.29">Sick unto death, his dwelling must look for</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.30">Unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fully</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.31">The end of his earthly existence was nearing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.32">His life-days’ limits. At last for the Danemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.33">When the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.34">The comer-from-far-land had cleansed then of evil,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.35">Wise and valiant, the war-hall of Hrothgar,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.36">Saved it from violence. He joyed in the night-work,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.37">In repute for prowess; the prince of the Geatmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.38">For the East-Danish people his boast had accomplished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.39">Bettered their burdensome bale-sorrows fully,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.40">The craft-begot evil they erstwhile had suffered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.41">And were forced to endure from crushing oppression,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.42">Their manifold misery. ’Twas a manifest token,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.43">When the hero-in-battle the hand suspended,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.44">The arm and the shoulder (there was all of the claw</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XIII.45">Of Grendel together) ’neath great-stretching hall-roof.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>