<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 32</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXII">XXXII.</a>THE HOARD AND THE DRAGON.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.1">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.2">He sought of himself who sorely did harm him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.3">But, for need very pressing, the servant of one of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.4">The sons of the heroes hate-blows evaded,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.5">Seeking for shelter and the sin-driven warrior</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.6">Took refuge within there. He early looked in it,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.7">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.8">*         
*         
*         
*         
*         
*         *</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_76">[76]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.9">*    *    *    *    *  when the onset surprised him,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hoard.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.10">He a gem-vessel saw there: many of suchlike</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.11">Ancient ornaments in the earth-cave were lying,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.12">As in days of yore some one of men of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.13">Illustrious lineage, as a legacy monstrous,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.14">There had secreted them, careful and thoughtful,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.15">Dear-valued jewels. Death had offsnatched them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.16">In the days of the past, and the one man moreover</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.17">Of the flower of the folk who fared there the longest,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.18">Was fain to defer it, friend-mourning warder,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.19">A little longer to be left in enjoyment</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.20">Of long-lasting treasure.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> A barrow all-ready</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.21">Stood on the plain the stream-currents nigh to,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.22">New by the ness-edge, unnethe of approaching:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.23">The keeper of rings carried within a</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.24"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup>Ponderous deal of the treasure of nobles,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.25">Of gold that was beaten, briefly he spake then:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.3" id="XXXII.FNREF.3" title="Some read ‘fec-word’ (2247), and render: Banning words uttered.">3</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">The ring-giver bewails
the loss of
retainers.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.26">“Hold thou, O Earth, now heroes no more may,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.27">The earnings of earlmen. Lo! erst in thy bosom</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.28">Worthy men won them; war-death hath ravished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.29">Perilous life-bale, all my warriors,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.30">Liegemen belovèd, who this life have forsaken,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.31">Who hall-pleasures saw. No sword-bearer have I,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.32">And no one to burnish the gold-plated vessel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.33">The high-valued beaker: my heroes are vanished.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.34">The hardy helmet behung with gilding</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.35">Shall be reaved of its riches: the ring-cleansers slumber</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.36">Who were charged to have ready visors-for-battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.37">And the burnie that bided in battle-encounter</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_77">[77]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.38">O’er breaking of war-shields the bite of the edges</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.39">Moulds with the hero. The ring-twisted armor,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.40">Its lord being lifeless, no longer may journey</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.41">Hanging by heroes; harp-joy is vanished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.42">The rapture of glee-wood, no excellent falcon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.43">Swoops through the building, no swift-footed charger</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.44">Grindeth the gravel. A grievous destruction</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.45">No few of the world-folk widely hath scattered!”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.46">So, woful of spirit one after all</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.47">Lamented mournfully, moaning in sadness</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.48">By day and by night, till death with its billows</div>
<span class="sidenote">The fire-dragon</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.49">Dashed on his spirit. Then the ancient dusk-scather</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.50">Found the great treasure standing all open,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.51">He who flaming and fiery flies to the barrows,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.52">Naked war-dragon, nightly escapeth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.53">Encompassed with fire; men under heaven</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.54">Widely beheld him. ’Tis said that he looks for<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.4" id="XXXII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.55">The hoard in the earth, where old he is guarding</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.56">The heathenish treasure; he’ll be nowise the better.</div>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon meets
his match.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.57">So three-hundred winters the waster of peoples</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.58">Held upon earth that excellent hoard-hall,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.59">Till the forementioned earlman angered him bitterly:</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.60">The beat-plated beaker he bare to his chieftain</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.61">And fullest remission for all his remissness</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.62">Begged of his liegelord. Then the hoard<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.5" id="XXXII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> was discovered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.63">The treasure was taken, his petition was granted</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hero plunders
the dragon’s den</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.64">The lorn-mooded liegeman. His lord regarded</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.65">The old-work of earth-folk—’twas the earliest occasion.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.66">When the dragon awoke, the strife was renewed there;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.67">He snuffed ’long the stone then, stout-hearted found he</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_78">[78]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.68">The footprint of foeman; too far had he gone</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.69">With cunning craftiness close to the head of</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.70">The fire-spewing dragon. So undoomed he may ’scape from</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.71">Anguish and exile with ease who possesseth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.72">The favor of Heaven. The hoard-warden eagerly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.73">Searched o’er the ground then, would meet with the person</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.74">That caused him sorrow while in slumber reclining:</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.75">Gleaming and wild he oft went round the cavern,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.76">All of it outward; not any of earthmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.77">Was seen in that desert.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.6" id="XXXII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup> Yet he joyed in the battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.78">Rejoiced in the conflict: oft he turned to the barrow,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.79">Sought for the gem-cup;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXII.FNDEF.7" id="XXXII.FNREF.7">7</a></sup> this he soon perceived then</div>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon perceives
that some
one has disturbed
his treasure.</span>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.80">That some man or other had discovered the gold,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.81">The famous folk-treasure. Not fain did the hoard-ward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.82">Wait until evening; then the ward of the barrow</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.83">Was angry in spirit, the loathèd one wished to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.84">Pay for the dear-valued drink-cup with fire.</div>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.85">Then the day was done as the dragon would have it,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.86">He no longer would wait on the wall, but departed</div>
<span class="sidenote">The dragon is infuriated.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.87">Fire-impelled, flaming. Fearful the start was</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.88">To earls in the land, as it early thereafter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXII.89">To their giver-of-gold was grievously ended.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">long-gestréona</span>,’ B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">láengestréona</span>,’ and renders, <i>Of fleeting
treasures</i>. S. accepts H.’s ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">long-gestréona</span>,<span class="add" title="Added">’</span> but renders, <i>The treasure long
in accumulating</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hard-fyrdne</span>’ (2246), B. first suggested ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hard-fyndne</span>,’ rendering:
<i>A heap of treasures … so great that its equal would be hard to find</i>. The same
scholar suggests later ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord-wynne dæl</span>’ = <i>A deal of treasure-joy</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Some read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fec-word</span>’ (2247), and render: <i>Banning words uttered</i><span class="add" title="Added">.</span>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> An earlier reading of H.’s gave the following meaning to this passage:
<i>He is said to inhabit a mound under the earth, where he, etc.</i> The translation
in the text is more authentic.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> The repetition of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord</span>’ in this passage has led some scholars to suggest
new readings to avoid the second ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hord</span>.’ This, however, is not under the
main stress, and, it seems to me, might easily be accepted.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> The reading of H.-So. is well defended in the notes to that volume. B.
emends and renders: <i>Nor was there any man in that desert who rejoiced in
conflict, in battle-work.</i> That is, the hoard-ward could not find any one who
had disturbed his slumbers, for no warrior was there, t.B.’s emendation
would give substantially the same translation.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXII.FNDEF.7">
<a href="#XXXII.FNREF.7">[7]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Sinc-fæt</span>’ (2301): this word both here and in v. 2232, t.B. renders
‘treasure.’
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXXIII">
</section></body></html>