<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 37</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXXVII">XXXVII.</a>THE FATAL STRUGGLE.—BEOWULF’S LAST MOMENTS.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf defends
Beowulf.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.1">Then I heard that at need of the king of the people</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.2">The upstanding earlman exhibited prowess,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.3">Vigor and courage, as suited his nature;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.4"><sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVII.FNDEF.1" id="XXXVII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup>He his head did not guard, but the high-minded liegeman’s</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.5">Hand was consumed, when he succored his kinsman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.6">So he struck the strife-bringing strange-comer lower,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.7">Earl-thane in armor, that <i>in</i> went the weapon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.8">Gleaming and plated, that ’gan then the fire<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVII.FNDEF.2" id="XXXVII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf draws
his knife,</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.9">Later to lessen. The liegelord himself then</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.10">Retained his consciousness, brandished his war-knife,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.11">Battle-sharp, bitter, that he bare on his armor:</div>
<span class="sidenote">and cuts the
dragon.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.12">The Weder-lord cut the worm in the middle.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.13">They had felled the enemy (life drove out then<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXXVII.FNDEF.3" id="XXXVII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.14">Puissant prowess), the pair had destroyed him,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.15">Land-chiefs related: so a liegeman should prove him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.16">A thaneman when needed. To the prince ’twas the last of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.17">His era of conquest by his own great achievements,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_92">[92]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf’s wound
swells and burns.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.18">The latest of world-deeds. The wound then began</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.19">Which the earth-dwelling dragon erstwhile had wrought him</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.20">To burn and to swell. He soon then discovered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.21">That bitterest bale-woe in his bosom was raging,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.22">Poison within. The atheling advanced then,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He sits down exhausted.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.23">That along by the wall, he prudent of spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.24">Might sit on a settle; he saw the giant-work,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.25">How arches of stone strengthened with pillars</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.26">The earth-hall eternal inward supported.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.27">Then the long-worthy liegeman laved with his hand the</div>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf bathes his
lord’s head.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.28">Far-famous chieftain, gory from sword-edge,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.29">Refreshing the face of his friend-lord and ruler,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.30">Sated with battle, unbinding his helmet.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.31">Beowulf answered, of his injury spake he,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.32">His wound that was fatal (he was fully aware</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.33">He had lived his allotted life-days enjoying</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.34">The pleasures of earth; then past was entirely</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.35">His measure of days, death very near):</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf regrets
that he has no son.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.36">“My son I would give now my battle-equipments,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.37">Had any of heirs been after me granted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.38">Along of my body. This people I governed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.39">Fifty of winters: no king ’mong my neighbors</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.40">Dared to encounter me with comrades-in-battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.41">Try me with terror. The time to me ordered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.42">I bided at home, mine own kept fitly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.43">Sought me no snares, swore me not many</div>
<span class="sidenote">I can rejoice in a
well-spent life.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.44">Oaths in injustice. Joy over all this</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.45">I’m able to have, though ill with my death-wounds;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.46">Hence the Ruler of Earthmen need not charge me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.47">With the killing of kinsmen, when cometh my life out</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.48">Forth from my body. Fare thou with haste now</div>
<span class="sidenote">Bring me the
hoard, Wiglaf, that
my dying eyes may
be refreshed by a
sight of it.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.49">To behold the hoard ’neath the hoar-grayish stone,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.50">Well-lovèd Wiglaf, now the worm is a-lying,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.51">Sore-wounded sleepeth, disseized of his treasure.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.52">Go thou in haste that treasures of old I,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.53">Gold-wealth may gaze on, together see lying</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_93">[93]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.54">The ether-bright jewels, be easier able,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.55">Having the heap of hoard-gems, to yield my</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVII.56">Life and the land-folk whom long I have governed.”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXXVII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> B. renders: <i>He</i> (<i>W</i>.) did not regard his (<i>the dragon’s</i>) <i>head</i> (since
Beowulf had struck it without effect), <i>but struck the dragon a little lower down.—</i>One
crux is to find out <i>whose head</i> is meant; another is to bring out the
antithesis between ‘head’ and ‘hand.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXXVII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þæt þæt fýr</span>’ (2702), S. emends to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þá þæt fýr</span>’ = <i>when the fire began to
grow less intense afterward</i>. This emendation relieves the passage of a
plethora of conjunctive <i lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæt</i>’s.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXXVII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXXVII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefyldan</span>’ (2707), S. proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefylde</span>.’ The passage would read:
<i>He felled the foe (life drove out strength), and they then both had destroyed him,
chieftains related</i>. This gives Beowulf the credit of having felled the dragon;
then they combine to annihilate him.—For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ellen</span>’ (2707), Kl. suggests
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">e(a)llne</span>.’—The reading ‘<i>life drove out strength</i>’ is very unsatisfactory and
very peculiar. I would suggest as follows: Adopt S.’s emendation, remove
H.’s parenthesis, read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ferh-ellen wræc</span>,’ and translate: <i>He felled the foe,
drove out his life-strength</i> (that is, made him <i>hors de combat</i>), <i>and then they
both, etc</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXXVIII">
</section></body></html>