<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XX">XX.</a>THE MOTHER OF GRENDEL.</h2>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.1">They sank then to slumber. With sorrow one paid for</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.2">His evening repose, as often betid them</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.3">While Grendel was holding<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.1" id="XX.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> the gold-bedecked palace,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.4">Ill-deeds performing, till his end overtook him,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.5">Death for his sins. ’Twas seen very clearly,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s mother
is known to be
thirsting for revenge.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.6">Known unto earth-folk, that still an avenger</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.7">Outlived the loathed one, long since the sorrow</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.8">Caused by the struggle; the mother of Grendel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.9">Devil-shaped woman, her woe ever minded,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.10">Who was held to inhabit the horrible waters,</div>
<span class="sidenote">[Grendel’s progenitor,
Cain, is again
referred to.]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.11">The cold-flowing currents, after Cain had become a</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.12">Slayer-with-edges to his one only brother,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.13">The son of his sire; he set out then banished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.14">Marked as a murderer, man-joys avoiding,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.15">Lived in the desert. Thence demons unnumbered</div>
<span class="sidenote">The poet again
magnifies Beowulf’s
valor.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.16">Fate-sent awoke; one of them Grendel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.17">Sword-cursèd, hateful, who at Heorot met with</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.18">A man that was watching, waiting the struggle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.19">Where a horrid one held him with hand-grapple sturdy;</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.20">Nathless he minded the might of his body,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.21">The glorious gift God had allowed him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.22">And folk-ruling Father’s favor relied on,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.23">His help and His comfort: so he conquered the foeman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.24">The hell-spirit humbled: he unhappy departed then,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.25">Reaved of his joyance, journeying to death-haunts,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.26">Foeman of man. His mother moreover</div>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s mother
comes to avenge
her son.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.27">Eager and gloomy was anxious to go on</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.28">Her mournful mission, mindful of vengeance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.29">For the death of her son. She came then to Heorot</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_45">[45]</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.30">Where the Armor-Dane earlmen all through the building</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.31">Were lying in slumber. Soon there became then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.32">Return<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.2" id="XX.FNREF.2">2</a></sup> to the nobles, when the mother of Grendel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.33">Entered the folk-hall; the fear was less grievous</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.34">By even so much as the vigor of maidens,</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.35">War-strength of women, by warrior is reckoned,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.36">When well-carved weapon, worked with the hammer,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.37">Blade very bloody, brave with its edges,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.38">Strikes down the boar-sign that stands on the helmet.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.39">Then the hard-edgèd weapon was heaved in the building,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.3" id="XX.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.40">The brand o’er the benches, broad-lindens many</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.41">Hand-fast were lifted; for helmet he recked not,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.42">For armor-net broad, whom terror laid hold of.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.43">She went then hastily, outward would get her</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.44">Her life for to save, when some one did spy her;</div>
<span class="sidenote">She seizes a favorite
liegemen of
Hrothgar’s.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.45">Soon she had grappled one of the athelings</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.46">Fast and firmly, when fenward she hied her;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.47">That one to Hrothgar was liefest of heroes</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.48">In rank of retainer where waters encircle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.49">A mighty shield-warrior, whom she murdered at slumber,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.50">A broadly-famed battle-knight. Beowulf was absent,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf was asleep
in another part of
the palace.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.51">But another apartment was erstwhile devoted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.52">To the glory-decked Geatman when gold was distributed.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.53">There was hubbub in Heorot. The hand that was famous</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.54">She grasped in its gore;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.4" id="XX.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> grief was renewed then</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_46">[46]</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.55">In homes and houses: ’twas no happy arrangement</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.56">In both of the quarters to barter and purchase</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.57">With lives of their friends. Then the well-agèd ruler,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.58">The gray-headed war-thane, was woful in spirit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.59">When his long-trusted liegeman lifeless he knew of,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is sent
for.</span>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.60">His dearest one gone. Quick from a room was</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.61">Beowulf brought, brave and triumphant.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.62">As day was dawning in the dusk of the morning,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He comes at
Hrothgar’s summons.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.63">Went then that earlman, champion noble,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.64">Came with comrades, where the clever one bided</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.65">Whether God all gracious would grant him a respite</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.66">After the woe he had suffered. The war-worthy hero</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.67">With a troop of retainers trod then the pavement</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.68">(The hall-building groaned), till he greeted the wise one,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf inquires
how Hrothgar had
enjoyed his night’s
rest.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.69">The earl of the Ingwins;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XX.FNDEF.5" id="XX.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> asked if the night had</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XX.70">Fully refreshed him, as fain he would have it.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Several eminent authorities either read or emend the MS. so as to make
this verse read, <i>While Grendel was wasting the gold-bedecked palace</i>. So <a href="#L.XX.15">20 <span class="smaller">15</span></a>
below: <i>ravaged the desert</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.2">[2]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sóna</span>’ (1281), t.B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sára</span>,’ limiting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edhwyrft</span>.’ Read then:
<i>Return of sorrows to the nobles, etc</i>. This emendation supplies the syntactical
gap after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edhwyrft</span>.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.3">[3]</a> Some authorities follow Grein’s lexicon in treating ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">heard ecg</span>’ as an adj.
limiting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">sweord</span>’: H.-So. renders it as a subst. (So v. 1491.) The sense of
the translation would be the same.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.4">[4]</a> B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under hróf genam</span>’ (v. 1303). This emendation, as well as
an emendation with (?) to v. 739, he offers, because ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under</span>’ baffles him in
both passages. All we need is to take ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under</span>’ in its secondary meaning of
‘in,’ which, though not given by Grein, occurs in the literature. Cf. Chron.
876 (March’s A.-S. Gram. § 355) and Oro. Amaz. I. 10, where ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">under</span>’ = <i>in
the midst of</i>. Cf. modern Eng. ‘in such circumstances,’ which interchanges
in good usage with ‘under such circumstances.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XX.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#XX.FNREF.5">[5]</a> For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">néod-laðu</span>’ (1321) C. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">néad-láðum</span>,’ and translates: <i>asked
whether the night had been pleasant to him after crushing-hostility</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXI">
</section></body></html>