<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.VII">VII.</a>HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar remembers
Beowulf as a
youth, and also
remembers his
father.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.1">Hrothgar answered, helm of the Scyldings:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.2">“I remember this man as the merest of striplings.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.3">His father long dead now was Ecgtheow titled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.4">Him Hrethel the Geatman granted at home his</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.5">One only daughter; his battle-brave son</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.6">Is come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.7">Seafaring sailors asserted it then,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is reported
to have the
strength of thirty
men.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.8">Who valuable gift-gems of the Geatmen<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.1" id="VII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> carried</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.9">As peace-offering thither, that he thirty men’s grapple</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.10">Has in his hand, the hero-in-battle.</div>
<span class="sidenote">God hath sent him
to our rescue.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.11">The holy Creator usward sent him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.12">To West-Dane warriors, I ween, for to render</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.13">’Gainst Grendel’s grimness gracious assistance:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.14">I shall give to the good one gift-gems for courage.</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.15">Hasten to bid them hither to speed them,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.2" id="VII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.16">To see assembled this circle of kinsmen;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.17">Tell them expressly they’re welcome in sooth to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.18">The men of the Danes.” To the door of the building</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_15">[15]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Wulfgar invites the
strangers in.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.19">Wulfgar went then, this word-message shouted:</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.20">“My victorious liegelord bade me to tell you,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.21">The East-Danes’ atheling, that your origin knows he,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.22">And o’er wave-billows wafted ye welcome are hither,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.23">Valiant of spirit. Ye straightway may enter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.24">Clad in corslets, cased in your helmets,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.25">To see King Hrothgar. Here let your battle-boards,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.26">Wood-spears and war-shafts, await your conferring.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.27">The mighty one rose then, with many a liegeman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.28">An excellent thane-group; some there did await them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.29">And as bid of the brave one the battle-gear guarded.</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.30">Together they hied them, while the hero did guide them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.31">’Neath Heorot’s roof; the high-minded went then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.32">Sturdy ’neath helmet till he stood in the building.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.33">Beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.34">His armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman):</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf salutes
Hrothgar, and
then proceeds to
boast of his youthful
achievements.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.35">“Hail thou, Hrothgar! I am Higelac’s kinsman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.36">And vassal forsooth; many a wonder</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.37">I dared as a stripling. The doings of Grendel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.38">In far-off fatherland I fully did know of:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.39">Sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth,</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.40">Excellent edifice, empty and useless</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.41">To all the earlmen after evenlight’s glimmer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.42">’Neath heaven’s bright hues hath hidden its glory.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.43">This my earls then urged me, the most excellent of them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.44">Carles very clever, to come and assist thee,</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.45">Folk-leader Hrothgar; fully they knew of</div>
<span class="sidenote">His fight with the
nickers.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.46">The strength of my body. Themselves they beheld me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.47">When I came from the contest, when covered with gore</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.48">Foes I escaped from, where five<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.3" id="VII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> I had bound,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_16">[16]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.49">The giant-race wasted, in the waters destroying</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.50">The nickers by night, bore numberless sorrows,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.51">The Weders avenged (woes had they suffered)</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.52">Enemies ravaged; alone now with Grendel</div>
<span class="sidenote">He intends to fight
Grendel unaided.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.53">I shall manage the matter, with the monster of evil,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.54">The giant, decide it. Thee I would therefore</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.55">Beg of thy bounty, Bright-Danish chieftain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.56">Lord of the Scyldings, this single petition:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.57">Not to refuse me, defender of warriors,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.58">Friend-lord of folks, so far have I sought thee,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.59">That <i>I</i> may unaided, my earlmen assisting me,</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.60">This brave-mooded war-band, purify Heorot.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.61">I have heard on inquiry, the horrible creature</div>
<span class="sidenote">Since the monster
uses no weapons,</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.62">From veriest rashness recks not for weapons;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.63">I this do scorn then, so be Higelac gracious,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.64">My liegelord belovèd, lenient of spirit,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.65">To bear a blade or a broad-fashioned target,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.66">A shield to the onset; only with hand-grip</div>
<span class="sidenote">I, too, shall disdain
to use any.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.67">The foe I must grapple, fight for my life then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.68">Foeman with foeman; he fain must rely on</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.69">The doom of the Lord whom death layeth hold of.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Should he crush
me, he will eat my
companions as he
has eaten thy
thanes.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.70">I ween he will wish, if he win in the struggle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.71">To eat in the war-hall earls of the Geat-folk,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.72">Boldly to swallow<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.4" id="VII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup> them, as of yore he did often</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.73">The best of the Hrethmen! Thou needest not trouble</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.74">A head-watch to give me;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.5" id="VII.FNREF.5">5</a></sup> he will have me dripping</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_17">[17]</span>
<span class="sidenote">In case of my defeat,
thou wilt not
have the trouble of
burying me.</span>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.75">And dreary with gore, if death overtake me,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.6" id="VII.FNREF.6">6</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.76">Will bear me off bleeding, biting and mouthing me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.77">The hermit will eat me, heedless of pity,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.78">Marking the moor-fens; no more wilt thou need then</div>
<span class="sidenote">Should I fall, send
my armor to my
lord, King Higelac.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.79">Find me my food.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#VII.FNDEF.7" id="VII.FNREF.7">7</a></sup> If I fall in the battle,</div>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.80">Send to Higelac the armor that serveth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.81">To shield my bosom, the best of equipments,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.82">Richest of ring-mails; ’tis the relic of Hrethla,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Weird is supreme</span>
<div class="l" id="L.VII.83">The work of Wayland. Goes Weird as she must go!”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Some render ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gif-sceattas</span>’ by ‘tribute.’—‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Géata</span>’ B. and Th. emended to
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Géatum</span>.’ If this be accepted, change ‘<i>of</i> the Geatmen’ to ‘<i>to</i> the Geatmen.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> If t.B.’s emendation of vv. 386, 387 be accepted, the two lines, ‘Hasten
… kinsmen’ will read: <i>Hasten thou, bid the throng of kinsmen go into the
hall together</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> For 420 (<i>b</i>) and 421 (<i>a</i>), B. suggests: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þær ic (on) fífelgeban ýðde
eotena cyn</span> = <i>where I in the ocean destroyed the eoten-race</i>.—t.B. accepts B.’s
“brilliant” ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fífelgeban</span>,’ omits ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">on</span>,’ emends ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cyn</span>’ to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hám</span>,’ arranging: <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þær ic
fífelgeban ýðde, eotena hám</span> = <i>where I desolated the ocean, the home of the
eotens</i>.—This would be better but for changing ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cyn</span>’ to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hám</span>.’—I suggest:
<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þær ic fífelgeband (cf. nhd. Bande) ýðde, eotena cyn</span> = <i>where I conquered the
monster band, the race of the eotens</i>. This makes no change except to read
‘<i lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fífel</i>’ for ‘<i lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">fífe</i>.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Unforhte</span>’ (444) is much disputed.—H.-So. wavers between adj. and adv.
Gr. and B. take it as an adv. modifying <i><span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">etan</span>: Will eat the Geats fearlessly</i>.—Kl.
considers this reading absurd, and proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">anforhte</span>’ = timid.—Understanding
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unforhte</span>’ as an adj. has this advantage, viz. that it gives a parallel
to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Geátena leóde</span>’: but to take it as an adv. is more natural. Furthermore, to
call the Geats ‘brave’ might, at this point, seem like an implied thrust at the
Danes, so long helpless; while to call his own men ‘timid’ would be befouling
his own nest.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.5">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.5">[5]</a> For ‘head-watch,’ cf. H.-So. notes and cf. v. 2910.—Th. translates: <i>Thou
wilt not need my head to hide</i> (i.e., thou wilt have no occasion to bury me, as
Grendel will devour me whole).—Simrock imagines a kind of dead-watch.—Dr. H. Wood
suggests: <i>Thou wilt not have to bury so much as my head</i> (for
Grendel will be a thorough undertaker),—grim humor.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.6">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.6">[6]</a> S. proposes a colon after ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">nimeð</span>’ (l. 447). This would make no essential
change in the translation.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="VII.FNDEF.7">
<a href="#VII.FNREF.7">[7]</a> Owing to the vagueness of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feorme</span>’ (451), this passage is variously translated.
In our translation, H.-So.’s glossary has been quite closely followed.
This agrees substantially with B.’s translation (P. and B. XII. 87). R. translates:
<i>Thou needst not take care longer as to the consumption of my dead
body.</i> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Líc</span>’ is also a crux here, as it may mean living body or dead body.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="VIII">
</section></body></html>