<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
<span>XXXV.</span>
<span>REMINISCENCES (<i>continued</i>).—BEOWULF’S LAST BATTLE.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.1">“He seeks then his chamber, singeth a woe-song</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.2">One for the other; all too extensive</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.3">Seemed homesteads and plains. So the helm of the Weders</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.4">Mindful of Herebald heart-sorrow carried,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.5">Stirred with emotion, nowise was able</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.6">To wreak his ruin on the ruthless destroyer:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.7">He was unable to follow the warrior with hatred,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.8">With deeds that were direful, though dear he not held him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.9">Then pressed by the pang this pain occasioned him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.10">He gave up glee, God-light elected;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.11">He left to his sons, as the man that is rich does,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.12">His land and fortress, when from life he departed.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.13">Then was crime and hostility ’twixt Swedes and Geatmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.14">O’er wide-stretching water warring was mutual,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.15">Burdensome hatred, when Hrethel had perished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.16">And Ongentheow’s offspring were active and valiant,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.17">Wished not to hold to peace oversea, but</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.18">Round Hreosna-beorh often accomplished</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.19">Cruelest massacre. This my kinsman avengèd,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.20">The feud and fury, as ’tis found on inquiry,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.21">Though one of them paid it with forfeit of life-joys,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.22">With price that was hard: the struggle became then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.23">Fatal to Hæthcyn, lord of the Geatmen.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.24">Then I heard that at morning one brother the other</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.25">With edges of irons egged on to murder,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.26">Where Ongentheow maketh onset on Eofor:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.27">The helmet crashed, the hoary-haired Scylfing</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.28">Sword-smitten fell, his hand then remembered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.29">Feud-hate sufficient, refused not the death-blow.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.30">The gems that he gave me, with jewel-bright sword I</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.31">’Quited in contest, as occasion was offered:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.32">Land he allowed me, life-joy at homestead,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.33">Manor to live on. Little he needed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.34">From Gepids or Danes or in Sweden to look for</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.35">Trooper less true, with treasure to buy him;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.36">’Mong foot-soldiers ever in front I would hie me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.37">Alone in the vanguard, and evermore gladly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.38">Warfare shall wage, while this weapon endureth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.39">That late and early often did serve me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.40">When I proved before heroes the slayer of Dæghrefn,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.41">Knight of the Hugmen: he by no means was suffered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.42">To the king of the Frisians to carry the jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.43">The breast-decoration; but the banner-possessor</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.44">Bowed in the battle, brave-mooded atheling.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.45">No weapon was slayer, but war-grapple broke then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.46">The surge of his spirit, his body destroying.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.47">Now shall weapon’s edge make war for the treasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.48">And hand and firm-sword.” Beowulf spake then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.49">Boast-words uttered—the latest occasion:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.50">“I braved in my youth-days battles unnumbered;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.51">Still am I willing the struggle to look for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.52">Fame-deeds perform, folk-warden prudent,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.53">If the hateful despoiler forth from his cavern</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.54">Seeketh me out!” Each of the heroes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.55">Helm-bearers sturdy, he thereupon greeted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.56">Belovèd co-liegemen—his last salutation:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.57">“No brand would I bear, no blade for the dragon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.58">Wist I a way my word-boast to ’complish</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.59">Else with the monster, as with Grendel I did it;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.60">But fire in the battle hot I expect there,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.61">Furious flame-burning: so I fixed on my body</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.62">Target and war-mail. The ward of the barrow</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.63">I’ll not flee from a foot-length, the foeman uncanny.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.64">At the wall ’twill befall us as Fate decreeth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.65">Each one’s Creator. I am eager in spirit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.66">With the wingèd war-hero to away with all boasting.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.67">Bide on the barrow with burnies protected,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.68">Earls in armor, which of <i>us</i> two may better</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.69">Bear his disaster, when the battle is over.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.70">’Tis no matter of yours, and man cannot do it,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.71">But me and me only, to measure his strength with</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.72">The monster of malice, might-deeds to ’complish.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.73">I with prowess shall gain the gold, or the battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.74">Direful death-woe will drag off your ruler!”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.75">The mighty champion rose by his shield then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.76">Brave under helmet, in battle-mail went he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.77">’Neath steep-rising stone-cliffs, the strength he relied on</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.78">Of one man alone: no work for a coward.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.79">Then he saw by the wall who a great many battles</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.80">Had lived through, most worthy, when foot-troops collided,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.81">Stone-arches standing, stout-hearted champion,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.82">Saw a brook from the barrow bubbling out thenceward:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.83">The flood of the fountain was fuming with war-flame:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.84">Not nigh to the hoard, for season the briefest</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.85">Could he brave, without burning, the abyss that was yawning,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.86">The drake was so fiery. The prince of the Weders</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.87">Caused then that words came from his bosom,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.88">So fierce was his fury; the firm-hearted shouted:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.89">His battle-clear voice came in resounding</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.90">’Neath the gray-colored stone. Stirred was his hatred,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.91">The hoard-ward distinguished the speech of a man;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.92">Time was no longer to look out for friendship.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.93">The breath of the monster issued forth first,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.94">Vapory war-sweat, out of the stone-cave:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.95">The earth re-echoed. The earl ’neath the barrow</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.96">Lifted his shield, lord of the Geatmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.97">Tow’rd the terrible stranger: the ring-twisted creature’s</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.98">Heart was then ready to seek for a struggle.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.99">The excellent battle-king first brandished his weapon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.100">The ancient heirloom, of edges unblunted,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.101">To the death-planners twain was terror from other.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.102">The lord of the troopers intrepidly stood then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.103">’Gainst his high-rising shield, when the dragon coiled him</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.104">Quickly together: in corslet he bided.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.105">He went then in blazes, bended and striding,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.106">Hasting him forward. His life and body</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.107">The targe well protected, for time-period shorter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.108">Than wish demanded for the well-renowned leader,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.109">Where he then for the first day was forced to be victor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.110">Famous in battle, as Fate had not willed it.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.111">The lord of the Geatmen uplifted his hand then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.112">Smiting the fire-drake with sword that was precious,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.113">That bright on the bone the blade-edge did weaken,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.114">Bit more feebly than his folk-leader needed,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.115">Burdened with bale-griefs. Then the barrow-protector,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.116">When the sword-blow had fallen, was fierce in his spirit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.117">Flinging his fires, flamings of battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.118">Gleamed then afar: the gold-friend of Weders</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.119">Boasted no conquests, his battle-sword failed him</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.120">Naked in conflict, as by no means it ought to,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.121">Long-trusty weapon. ’Twas no slight undertaking</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.122">That Ecgtheow’s famous offspring would leave</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.123">The drake-cavern’s bottom; he must live in some region</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.124">Other than this, by the will of the dragon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.125">As each one of earthmen existence must forfeit.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.126">’Twas early thereafter the excellent warriors</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.127">Met with each other. Anew and afresh</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.128">The hoard-ward took heart (gasps heaved then his bosom):</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.129">Sorrow he suffered encircled with fire</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.130">Who the people erst governed. His companions by no means</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.131">Were banded about him, bairns of the princes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.132">With valorous spirit, but they sped to the forest,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.133">Seeking for safety. The soul-deeps of one were</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.134">Ruffled by care: kin-love can never</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXV.135">Aught in him waver who well doth consider.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>