<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1: The Life and Death of Scyld</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Life and Death of Scyld</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="poem-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Lo! the Spear-Danes’ glory through splendid achievements</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The folk-kings’ former fame we have heard of,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How princes displayed then their prowess-in-battle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft Scyld the Scefing from scathers in numbers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From many a people their mead-benches tore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since first he found him friendless and wretched,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earl had had terror: comfort he got for it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waxed ’neath the welkin, world-honor gained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till all his neighbors o’er sea were compelled to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bow to his bidding and bring him their tribute:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An excellent atheling!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> After was borne him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A son and heir, young in his dwelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom God-Father sent to solace the people.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had marked the misery malice had caused them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That reaved of their rulers they wretched had erstwhile</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="span-16">Long been afflicted. The Lord, in requital,</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="span-17">Wielder<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> of Glory, with world-honor blessed him.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Famed was Beowulf, far spread the glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Scyld’s great son in the lands of the Danemen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the carle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> that is young, by kindnesses rendered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friends of his father, with fees in abundance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must be able to earn that when age approacheth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager companions aid him requitingly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When war assaults him serve him as liegemen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By praise-worthy actions must honor be got</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mong all of the races. At the hour that was fated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scyld then departed to the All-Father’s keeping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warlike to wend him; away then they bare him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the flood of the current, his fond-loving comrades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="span-30">As himself he had bidden, while the friend of the Scyldings</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="span-31">Word-sway wielded, and the well-lovèd land-prince</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="span-32">Long did rule them. The ring-stemmèd vessel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bark of the atheling, lay there at anchor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Icy in glimmer and eager for sailing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The belovèd leader laid they down there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giver of rings, on the breast of the vessel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The famed by the mainmast. A many of jewels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fretted embossings, from far-lands brought over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was placed near at hand then; and heard I not ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a folk ever furnished a float<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> more superbly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With weapons of warfare, weeds for the battle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bills<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> and burnies;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> on his bosom sparkled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a jewel that with him must travel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the flush of the flood afar on the current.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And favors no fewer they furnished him soothly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excellent folk-gems, than others had given him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who when first he was born outward did send him</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lone on the main, the merest of infants:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a gold-fashioned standard they stretched under heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High o’er his head, let the holm-currents<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> bear him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seaward consigned him: sad was their spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their mood very mournful. Men are not able</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="span-53">Soothly to tell us, they in halls who reside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="span-54">Heroes under heaven, to what haven he hied.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
