<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XVIII">XVIII.</a>THE FINN EPISODE (<i>continued</i>).—THE BANQUET CONTINUES.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">The survivors go
to Friesland, the
home of Finn.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.1">“Then the warriors departed to go to their dwellings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.2">Reaved of their friends, Friesland to visit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.3">Their homes and high-city. Hengest continued</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hengest remains
there all winter,
unable to get away.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.4">Biding with Finn the blood-tainted winter,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.5">Wholly unsundered;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVIII.FNDEF.1" id="XVIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup> of fatherland thought he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.6">Though unable to drive the ring-stemmèd vessel</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_40">[40]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.7">O’er the ways of the waters; the wave-deeps were tossing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.8">Fought with the wind; winter in ice-bonds</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.9">Closed up the currents, till there came to the dwelling</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.10">A year in its course, as yet it revolveth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.11">If season propitious one alway regardeth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.12">World-cheering weathers. Then winter was gone,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.13">Earth’s bosom was lovely; the exile would get him,</div>
<span class="sidenote">He devises
schemes of vengeance.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.14">The guest from the palace; on grewsomest vengeance</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.15">He brooded more eager than on oversea journeys,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.16">Whe’r onset-of-anger he were able to ’complish,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.17">The bairns of the Jutemen therein to remember.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.18">Nowise refused he the duties of liegeman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.19">When Hun of the Frisians the battle-sword Láfing,</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.20">Fairest of falchions, friendly did give him:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.21">Its edges were famous in folk-talk of Jutland.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.22">And savage sword-fury seized in its clutches</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.23">Bold-mooded Finn where he bode in his palace,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Guthlaf and Oslaf
revenge Hnæf’s
slaughter.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.24">When the grewsome grapple Guthlaf and Oslaf</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.25">Had mournfully mentioned, the mere-journey over,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.26">For sorrows half-blamed him; the flickering spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.27">Could not bide in his bosom. Then the building was covered<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVIII.FNDEF.2" id="XVIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">Finn is slain.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.28">With corpses of foemen, and Finn too was slaughtered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.29">The king with his comrades, and the queen made a prisoner.</div>
<span class="sidenote">The jewels of Finn,
and his queen are
carried away by
the Danes.</span>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.30">The troops of the Scyldings bore to their vessels</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.31">All that the land-king had in his palace,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.32">Such trinkets and treasures they took as, on searching,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.33">At Finn’s they could find. They ferried to Daneland</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.34">The excellent woman on oversea journey,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The lay is concluded,
and the
main story is resumed.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.35">Led her to their land-folk.” The lay was concluded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.36">The gleeman’s recital. Shouts again rose then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.37">Bench-glee resounded, bearers then offered</div>
<span class="sidenote">Skinkers carry
round the beaker.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.38">Wine from wonder-vats. Wealhtheo advanced then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.39">Going ’neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_41">[41]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Queen Wealhtheow
greets
Hrothgar, as he
sits beside Hrothulf,
his nephew.</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.40">Uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.41">True each to the other. And Unferth the spokesman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.42">Sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.43">Each trusted his spirit that his mood was courageous,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.44">Though at fight he had failed in faith to his kinsmen.</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.45">Said the queen of the Scyldings: “My lord and protector,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.46">Treasure-bestower, take thou this beaker;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.47">Joyance attend thee, gold-friend of heroes,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Be generous to
the Geats.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.48">And greet thou the Geatmen with gracious responses!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.49">So ought one to do. Be kind to the Geatmen,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.50">In gifts not niggardly; anear and afar now</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.51">Peace thou enjoyest. Report hath informed me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.52">Thou’lt have for a bairn the battle-brave hero.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.53">Now is Heorot cleansèd, ring-palace gleaming;</div>
<span class="sidenote">Have as much joy
as possible in thy
hall, once more
purified.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.54">Give while thou mayest many rewards,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.55">And bequeath to thy kinsmen kingdom and people,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.56">On wending thy way to the Wielder’s splendor.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.57">I know good Hrothulf, that the noble young troopers</div>
<span class="sidenote">I know that Hrothulf
will prove faithful
if he survive
thee.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.58">He’ll care for and honor, lord of the Scyldings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.59">If earth-joys thou endest earlier than he doth;</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.60">I reckon that recompense he’ll render with kindness</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.61">Our offspring and issue, if that all he remember,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.62">What favors of yore, when he yet was an infant,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.63">We awarded to him for his worship and pleasure.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.64">Then she turned by the bench where her sons were carousing,</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.65">Hrethric and Hrothmund, and the heroes’ offspring,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is sitting
by the two royal
sons.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.66">The war-youth together; there the good one was sitting</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVIII.67">’Twixt the brothers twain, Beowulf Geatman.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XVIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XVIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> For 1130 (1) R. and Gr. suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">elne unflitme</span>’ as 1098 (1) reads. The
latter verse is undisputed; and, for the former, ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">elne</span>’ would be as possible as
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ealles</span>,’ and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unflitme</span>’ is well supported. Accepting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">elne unflitme</span>’ for both,
I would suggest ‘<i>very peaceably</i>’ for both places: (1) <i>Finn to Hengest very
peaceably vowed with oaths</i>, etc. (2) <i>Hengest then still the slaughter-stained
winter remained there with Finn very peaceably</i>. The two passages become
thus correlatives, the second a sequel of the first. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Elne</span>,’ in the sense of very
(<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">swíðe</span>), needs no argument; and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">unflitme</span>’ (from ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">flítan</span>’) can, it seems to
me, be more plausibly rendered ‘peaceful,’ ‘peaceable,’ than ‘contestable,’ or
‘conquerable.’
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XVIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XVIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Some scholars have proposed ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">roden</span>’; the line would then read: <i>Then
the building was reddened, etc.</i>, instead of ‘covered.’ The ‘h’ may have been
carried over from the three alliterating ‘h’s.’
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XIX">
</section></body></html>