<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 36</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
<span>XXXVI.</span>
<span>WIGLAF THE TRUSTY.—BEOWULF IS DESERTED BY FRIENDS AND BY SWORD.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.1">The son of Weohstan was Wiglaf entitled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.2">Shield-warrior precious, prince of the Scylfings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.3">Ælfhere’s kinsman: he saw his dear liegelord</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.4">Enduring the heat ’neath helmet and visor.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.5">Then he minded the holding that erst he had given him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.6">The Wægmunding warriors’ wealth-blessèd homestead,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.7">Each of the folk-rights his father had wielded;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.8">He was hot for the battle, his hand seized the target,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.9">The yellow-bark shield, he unsheathed his old weapon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.10">Which was known among earthmen as the relic of Eanmund,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.11">Ohthere’s offspring, whom, exiled and friendless,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.12">Weohstan did slay with sword-edge in battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.13">And carried his kinsman the clear-shining helmet,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.14">The ring-made burnie, the old giant-weapon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.15">That Onela gave him, his boon-fellow’s armor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.16">Ready war-trappings: he the feud did not mention,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.17">Though he’d fatally smitten the son of his brother.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.18">Many a half-year held he the treasures,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.19">The bill and the burnie, till his bairn became able,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.20">Like his father before him, fame-deeds to ’complish;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.21">Then he gave him ’mong Geatmen a goodly array of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.22">Weeds for his warfare; he went from life then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.23">Old on his journey. ’Twas the earliest time then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.24">That the youthful champion might charge in the battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.25">Aiding his liegelord; his spirit was dauntless.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.26">Nor did kinsman’s bequest quail at the battle:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.27">This the dragon discovered on their coming together.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.28">Wiglaf uttered many a right-saying,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.29">Said to his fellows, sad was his spirit:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.30">“I remember the time when, tasting the mead-cup,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.31">We promised in the hall the lord of us all</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.32">Who gave us these ring-treasures, that this battle-equipment,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.33">Swords and helmets, we’d certainly quite him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.34">Should need of such aid ever befall him:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.35">In the war-band he chose us for this journey spontaneously,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.36">Stirred us to glory and gave me these jewels,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.37">Since he held and esteemed us trust-worthy spearmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.38">Hardy helm-bearers, though this hero-achievement</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.39">Our lord intended alone to accomplish,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.40">Ward of his people, for most of achievements,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.41">Doings audacious, he did among earth-folk.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.42">The day is now come when the ruler of earthmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.43">Needeth the vigor of valiant heroes:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.44">Let us wend us towards him, the war-prince to succor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.45">While the heat yet rageth, horrible fire-fight.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.46">God wot in me, ’tis mickle the liefer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.47">The blaze should embrace my body and eat it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.48">With my treasure-bestower. Meseemeth not proper</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.49">To bear our battle-shields back to our country,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.50">’Less first we are able to fell and destroy the</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.51">Long-hating foeman, to defend the life of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.52">The prince of the Weders. Well do I know ’tisn’t</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.53">Earned by his exploits, he only of Geatmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.54">Sorrow should suffer, sink in the battle:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.55">Brand and helmet to us both shall be common,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.56">Shield-cover, burnie.” Through the bale-smoke he stalked then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.57">Went under helmet to the help of his chieftain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.58">Briefly discoursing: “Beowulf dear,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.59">Perform thou all fully, as thou formerly saidst,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.60">In thy youthful years, that while yet thou livedst</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.61">Thou wouldst let thine honor not ever be lessened.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.62">Thy life thou shalt save, mighty in actions,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.63">Atheling undaunted, with all of thy vigor;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.64">I’ll give thee assistance.” The dragon came raging,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.65">Wild-mooded stranger, when these words had been uttered</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.66">(’Twas the second occasion), seeking his enemies,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.67">Men that were hated, with hot-gleaming fire-waves;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.68">With blaze-billows burned the board to its edges:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.69">The fight-armor failed then to furnish assistance</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.70">To the youthful spear-hero: but the young-agèd stripling</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.71">Quickly advanced ’neath his kinsman’s war-target,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.72">Since his own had been ground in the grip of the fire.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.73">Then the warrior-king was careful of glory,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.74">He soundly smote with sword-for-the-battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.75">That it stood in the head by hatred <span class="corr" title="original: ydriven">driven</span>;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.76">Nægling was shivered, the old and iron-made</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.77">Brand of Beowulf in battle deceived him.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.78">’Twas denied him that edges of irons were able</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.79">To help in the battle; the hand was too mighty</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.80">Which every weapon, as I heard on inquiry,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.81">Outstruck in its stroke, when to struggle he carried</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.82">The wonderful war-sword: it waxed him no better.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.83">Then the people-despoiler—third of his onsets—</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.84">Fierce-raging fire-drake, of feud-hate was mindful,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.85">Charged on the strong one, when chance was afforded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.86">Heated and war-grim, seized on his neck</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.87">With teeth that were bitter; he bloody did wax with</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXXVI.88">Soul-gore seething; sword-blood in waves boiled.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>