<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 30</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
<span>XXX.</span>
<span>BEOWULF NARRATES HIS ADVENTURES TO HIGELAC.</span>
</h2>
<p>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.1">“It well may discomfit the prince of the Heathobards</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.2">And each of the thanemen of earls that attend him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.3">When he goes to the building escorting the woman,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.4">That a noble-born Daneman the knights should be feasting:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.5">There gleam on his person the leavings of elders</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.6">Hard and ring-bright, Heathobards’ treasure,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.7">While they wielded their arms, till they misled to the battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.8">Their own dear lives and belovèd companions.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.9">He saith at the banquet who the collar beholdeth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.10">An ancient ash-warrior who earlmen’s destruction</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.11">Clearly recalleth (cruel his spirit),</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.12">Sadly beginneth sounding the youthful</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.13">Thane-champion’s spirit through the thoughts of his bosom,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.14">War-grief to waken, and this word-answer speaketh:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.15">‘Art thou able, my friend, to know when thou seest it</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.16">The brand which thy father bare to the conflict</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.17">In his latest adventure, ’neath visor of helmet,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.18">The dearly-loved iron, where Danemen did slay him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.19">And brave-mooded Scyldings, on the fall of the heroes,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.20">(When vengeance was sleeping) the slaughter-place wielded?</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.21">E’en now some man of the murderer’s progeny</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.22">Exulting in ornaments enters the building,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.23">Boasts of his blood-shedding, offbeareth the jewel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.24">Which thou shouldst wholly hold in possession!’</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.25">So he urgeth and mindeth on every occasion</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.26">With woe-bringing words, till waxeth the season</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.27">When the woman’s thane for the works of his father,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.28">The bill having bitten, blood-gory sleepeth,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.29">Fated to perish; the other one thenceward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.30">’Scapeth alive, the land knoweth thoroughly.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.31">Then the oaths of the earlmen on each side are broken,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.32">When rancors unresting are raging in Ingeld</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.33">And his wife-love waxeth less warm after sorrow.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.34">So the Heathobards’ favor not faithful I reckon,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.35">Their part in the treaty not true to the Danemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.36">Their friendship not fast. I further shall tell thee</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.37">More about Grendel, that thou fully mayst hear,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.38">Ornament-giver, what afterward came from</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.39">The hand-rush of heroes. When heaven’s bright jewel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.40">O’er earthfields had glided, the stranger came raging,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.41">The horrible night-fiend, us for to visit,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.42">Where wholly unharmed the hall we were guarding.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.43">To Hondscio happened a hopeless contention,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.44">Death to the doomed one, dead he fell foremost,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.45">Girded war-champion; to him Grendel became then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.46">To the vassal distinguished, a tooth-weaponed murderer,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.47">The well-beloved henchman’s body all swallowed.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.48">Not the earlier off empty of hand did</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.49">The bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of evils,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.50">Wish to escape from the gold-giver’s palace,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.51">But sturdy of strength he strove to outdo me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.52">Hand-ready grappled. A glove was suspended</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.53">Spacious and wondrous, in art-fetters fastened,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.54">Which was fashioned entirely by touch of the craftman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.55">From the dragon’s skin by the devil’s devices:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.56">He down in its depths would do me unsadly</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.57">One among many, deed-doer raging,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.58">Though sinless he saw me; not so could it happen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.59">When I in my anger upright did stand.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.60">’Tis too long to recount how requital I furnished</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.61">For every evil to the earlmen’s destroyer;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.62">’Twas there, my prince, that I proudly distinguished</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.63">Thy land with my labors. He left and retreated,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.64">He lived his life a little while longer:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.65">Yet his right-hand guarded his footstep in Heorot,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.66">And sad-mooded thence to the sea-bottom fell he,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.67">Mournful in mind. For the might-rush of battle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.68">The friend of the Scyldings, with gold that was plated,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.69">With ornaments many, much requited me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.70">When daylight had dawned, and down to the banquet</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.71">We had sat us together. There was chanting and joyance:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.72">The age-stricken Scylding asked many questions</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.73">And of old-times related; oft light-ringing harp-strings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.74">Joy-telling wood, were touched by the brave one;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.75">Now he uttered measures, mourning and truthful,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.76">Then the large-hearted land-king a legend of wonder</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.77">Truthfully told us. Now troubled with years</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.78">The age-hoary warrior afterward began to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.79">Mourn for the might that marked him in youth-days;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.80">His breast within boiled, when burdened with winters</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.81">Much he remembered. From morning till night then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.82">We joyed us therein as etiquette suffered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.83">Till the second night season came unto earth-folk.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.84">Then early thereafter, the mother of Grendel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.85">Was ready for vengeance, wretched she journeyed;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.86">Her son had death ravished, the wrath of the Geatmen.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.87">The horrible woman avengèd her offspring,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.88">And with mighty mainstrength murdered a hero.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.89">There the spirit of Æschere, agèd adviser,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.90">Was ready to vanish; nor when morn had lightened</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.91">Were they anywise suffered to consume him with fire,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.92">Folk of the Danemen, the death-weakened hero,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.93">Nor the belovèd liegeman to lay on the pyre;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.94">She the corpse had offcarried in the clutch of the foeman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.95">’Neath mountain-brook’s flood. To Hrothgar ’twas saddest</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.96">Of pains that ever had preyed on the chieftain;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.97">By the life of thee the land-prince then me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.98">Besought very sadly, in sea-currents’ eddies</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.99">To display my prowess, to peril my safety,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.100">Might-deeds accomplish; much did he promise.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.101">I found then the famous flood-current’s cruel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.102">Horrible depth-warder. A while unto us two</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.103">Hand was in common; the currents were seething</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.104">With gore that was clotted, and Grendel’s fierce mother’s</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.105">Head I offhacked in the hall at the bottom</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.106">With huge-reaching sword-edge, hardly I wrested</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.107">My life from her clutches; not doomed was I then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.108">But the warden of earlmen afterward gave me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXX.109">Jewels in quantity, kinsman of Healfdene.</div>
</p>
</section></body></html>