<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXIV">XXIV.</a>BEOWULF IS DOUBLE-CONQUEROR.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf grasps a
giant-sword,</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.1">Then he saw mid the war-gems a weapon of victory,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.2">An ancient giant-sword, of edges a-doughty,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.3">Glory of warriors: of weapons ’twas choicest,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.4">Only ’twas larger than any man else was</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_54">[54]</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.5">Able to bear to the battle-encounter,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.6">The good and splendid work of the giants.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.7">He grasped then the sword-hilt, knight of the Scyldings,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.8">Bold and battle-grim, brandished his ring-sword,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.9">Hopeless of living, hotly he smote her,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.10">That the fiend-woman’s neck firmly it grappled,</div>
<span class="sidenote">and fells the female
monster.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.11">Broke through her bone-joints, the bill fully pierced her</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.12">Fate-cursèd body, she fell to the ground then:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.13">The hand-sword was bloody, the hero exulted.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.14">The brand was brilliant, brightly it glimmered,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.15">Just as from heaven gemlike shineth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.16">The torch of the firmament. He glanced ’long the building,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.17">And turned by the wall then, Higelac’s vassal</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.18">Raging and wrathful raised his battle-sword</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.19">Strong by the handle. The edge was not useless</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.20">To the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished to</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.21">Give Grendel requital for the many assaults he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.22">Had worked on the West-Danes not once, but often,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.23">When he slew in slumber the subjects of Hrothgar,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.24">Swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.25">Of the folk of the Danemen, and fully as many</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.26">Carried away, a horrible prey.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.27">He gave him requital, grim-raging champion,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf sees the
body of Grendel,
and cuts off his
head.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.28">When he saw on his rest-place weary of conflict</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.29">Grendel lying, of life-joys bereavèd,</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.30">As the battle at Heorot erstwhile had scathed him;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.31">His body far bounded, a blow when he suffered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.32">Death having seized him, sword-smiting heavy,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.33">And he cut off his head then. Early this noticed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.34">The clever carles who as comrades of Hrothgar</div>
<span class="sidenote">The waters are
gory.</span>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.35">Gazed on the sea-deeps, that the surging wave-currents</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.36">Were mightily mingled, the mere-flood was gory:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.37">Of the good one the gray-haired together held converse,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is given
up for dead.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.38">The hoary of head, that they hoped not to see again</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.39">The atheling ever, that exulting in victory</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.40">He’d return there to visit the distinguished folk-ruler:</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_55">[55]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.41">Then many concluded the mere-wolf had killed him.<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIV.FNDEF.1" id="XXIV.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.42">The ninth hour came then. From the ness-edge departed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.43">The bold-mooded Scyldings; the gold-friend of heroes</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.44">Homeward betook him. The strangers sat down then</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.45">Soul-sick, sorrowful, the sea-waves regarding:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.46">They wished and yet weened not their well-loved friend-lord</div>
<span class="sidenote">The giant-sword
melts.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.47">To see any more. The sword-blade began then,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.48">The blood having touched it, contracting and shriveling</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.49">With battle-icicles; ’twas a wonderful marvel</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.50">That it melted entirely, likest to ice when</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.51">The Father unbindeth the bond of the frost and</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.52">Unwindeth the wave-bands, He who wieldeth dominion</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.53">Of times and of tides: a truth-firm Creator.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.54">Nor took he of jewels more in the dwelling,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.55">Lord of the Weders, though they lay all around him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.56">Than the head and the handle handsome with jewels;</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_56">[56]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.57">The brand early melted, burnt was the weapon:<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIV.FNDEF.2" id="XXIV.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.58">So hot was the blood, the strange-spirit poisonous</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hero swims
back to the realms
of day.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.59">That in it did perish. He early swam off then</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.60">Who had bided in combat the carnage of haters,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.61">Went up through the ocean; the eddies were cleansèd,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.62">The spacious expanses, when the spirit from farland</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.63">His life put aside and this short-lived existence.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.64">The seamen’s defender came swimming to land then</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.65">Doughty of spirit, rejoiced in his sea-gift,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.66">The bulky burden which he bore in his keeping.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.67">The excellent vassals advanced then to meet him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.68">To God they were grateful, were glad in their chieftain,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.69">That to see him safe and sound was granted them.</div>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.70">From the high-minded hero, then, helmet and burnie</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.71">Were speedily loosened: the ocean was putrid,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.72">The water ’neath welkin weltered with gore.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.73">Forth did they fare, then, their footsteps retracing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.74">Merry and mirthful, measured the earth-way,</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.75">The highway familiar: men very daring<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIV.FNDEF.3" id="XXIV.FNREF.3">3</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.76">Bare then the head from the sea-cliff, burdening</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.77">Each of the earlmen, excellent-valiant.</div>
<span class="sidenote">It takes four men
to carry Grendel’s
head on a spear.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.78">Four of them had to carry with labor</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.79">The head of Grendel to the high towering gold-hall</div>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.80">Upstuck on the spear, till fourteen most-valiant</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.81">And battle-brave Geatmen came there going</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.82">Straight to the palace: the prince of the people</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.83">Measured the mead-ways, their mood-brave companion.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.84">The atheling of earlmen entered the building,</div>
<span class="linenum">85</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.85">Deed-valiant man, adorned with distinction,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.86">Doughty shield-warrior, to address King Hrothgar:</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_57">[57]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.87">Then hung by the hair, the head of Grendel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.88">Was borne to the building, where beer-thanes were drinking,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.89">Loth before earlmen and eke ’fore the lady:</div>
<span class="linenum">90</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIV.90">The warriors beheld then a wonderful sight.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXIV.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXIV.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Þæs monige gewearð</span>’ (1599) and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hafað þæs geworden</span>’ (2027).—In a
paper published some years ago in one of the Johns Hopkins University
circulars, I tried to throw upon these two long-doubtful passages some light
derived from a study of like passages in Alfred’s prose.—The impersonal verb
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">geweorðan</span>,’ with an accus. of the person, and a <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæt</span>-clause is used several
times with the meaning ‘agree.’ See Orosius (Sweet’s ed.) 178<sub>7</sub>; 204<sub>34</sub>;
208<sub>28</sub>; 210<sub>15</sub>; 280<sub>20</sub>. In the two Beowulf passages, the <span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæt</span>-clause is anticipated
by ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">þæs</span>,’ which is clearly a gen. of the thing agreed on.

<p>
The first passage (v. 1599 (b)-1600) I translate literally: <i>Then many
agreed upon this (namely), that the sea-wolf had killed him</i>.
</p>
<p>
The second passage (v. 2025 (b)-2027): <i>She is promised …; to this the
friend of the Scyldings has agreed, etc</i>. By emending ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">is</span>’ instead of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wæs</span>’
(2025), the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.
</p>
<p>
In v. 1997 ff. this same idiom occurs, and was noticed in B.’s great
article on Beowulf, which appeared about the time I published my reading
of 1599 and 2027. Translate 1997 then: <i>Wouldst let the South-Danes themselves
decide about their struggle with Grendel</i>. Here ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Súð-Dene</span>’ is accus.
of person, and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúðe</span>’ is gen. of thing agreed on.
</p>
<p>
With such collateral support as that afforded by B. (P. and B. XII. 97), I
have no hesitation in departing from H.-So., my usual guide.
</p>
<p>
The idiom above treated runs through A.-S., Old Saxon, and other Teutonic
languages, and should be noticed in the lexicons.
</p>
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIV.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXIV.FNREF.2">[2]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Bróden-mæl</span>’ is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeened
sword. Translate: <i>The damaskeened sword burned up</i>. Cf. <a href="#L.XXV.16">25 <span class="smaller">16</span></a> and note.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIV.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXIV.FNREF.3">[3]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Cyning-balde</span>’ (1635) is the much-disputed reading of K. and Th. To
render this, “<i>nobly bold</i>,” “<i>excellently bold</i>,” have been suggested. B. would
read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">cyning-holde</span>’ (cf. 290), and render: <i>Men well-disposed towards the
king carried the head, etc.</i> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Cynebealde</span>,’ says t.B., endorsing Gr.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXV">
</section></body></html>