<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 40</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XL">XL.</a>THE MESSENGER OF DEATH.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf sends the
news of Beowulf’s
death to liegemen
near by.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.1">Then he charged that the battle be announced at the hedge</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.2">Up o’er the cliff-edge, where the earl-troopers bided</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.3">The whole of the morning, mood-wretched sat them,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.4">Bearers of battle-shields, both things expecting,</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.5">The end of his lifetime and the coming again of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.6">The liegelord belovèd. Little reserved he</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.7">Of news that was known, who the ness-cliff did travel,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.8">But he truly discoursed to all that could hear him:</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_98">[98]</span>
<span class="sidenote">The messenger
speaks.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.9">“Now the free-giving friend-lord of the folk of the Weders,</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.10">The folk-prince of Geatmen, is fast in his death-bed,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.11">By the deeds of the dragon in death-bed abideth;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.12">Along with him lieth his life-taking foeman</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.13">Slain with knife-wounds: he was wholly unable</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.14">To injure at all the ill-planning monster</div>
<span class="sidenote">Wiglaf sits by our
dead lord.</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.15">With bite of his sword-edge. Wiglaf is sitting,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.16">Offspring of Wihstan, up over Beowulf,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.17">Earl o’er another whose end-day hath reached him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.18">Head-watch holdeth o’er heroes unliving,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XL.FNDEF.1" id="XL.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<span class="sidenote">Our lord’s death
will lead to
attacks from our
old foes.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.19">For friend and for foeman. The folk now expecteth</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.20">A season of strife when the death of the folk-king</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.21">To Frankmen and Frisians in far-lands is published.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.22">The war-hatred waxed warm ’gainst the Hugmen,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Higelac’s death
recalled.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.23">When Higelac came with an army of vessels</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.24">Faring to Friesland, where the Frankmen in battle</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.25">Humbled him and bravely with overmight ’complished</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.26">That the mail-clad warrior must sink in the battle,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.27">Fell ’mid his folk-troop: no fret-gems presented</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.28">The atheling to earlmen; aye was denied us</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.29">Merewing’s mercy. The men of the Swedelands</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.30">For truce or for truth trust I but little;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.31">But widely ’twas known that near Ravenswood Ongentheow</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hæthcyn’s fall
referred to.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.32">Sundered Hæthcyn the Hrethling from life-joys,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.33">When for pride overweening the War-Scylfings first did</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.34">Seek the Geatmen with savage intentions.</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.35">Early did Ohthere’s age-laden father,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.36">Old and terrible, give blow in requital,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.37">Killing the sea-king, the queen-mother rescued,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.38">The old one his consort deprived of her gold,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.39">Onela’s mother and Ohthere’s also,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_99">[99]</span>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.40">And then followed the feud-nursing foemen till hardly,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.41">Reaved of their ruler, they Ravenswood entered.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.42">Then with vast-numbered forces he assaulted the remnant,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.43">Weary with wounds, woe often promised</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.44">The livelong night to the sad-hearted war-troop:</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.45">Said he at morning would kill them with edges of weapons,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.46">Some on the gallows for glee to the fowls.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.47">Aid came after to the anxious-in-spirit</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.48">At dawn of the day, after Higelac’s bugle</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.49">And trumpet-sound heard they, when the good one proceeded</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XL.50">And faring followed the flower of the troopers.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XL.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XL.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Hige-méðum</span>’ (2910) is glossed by H. as dat. plu. (= for the dead). S.
proposes ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hige-méðe</span>,’ nom. sing. limiting Wigláf; i.e. <i>W., mood-weary, holds
head-watch o’er friend and foe</i>.—B. suggests taking the word as dat. inst.
plu. of an abstract noun in -‘u.’ The translation would be substantially the
same as S.’s.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XLI">
</section></body></html>