<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XVI">XVI.</a>HROTHGAR LAVISHES GIFTS UPON HIS DELIVERER.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Heorot is adorned
with hands.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.1">Then straight was ordered that Heorot inside<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVI.FNDEF.1" id="XVI.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.2">With hands be embellished: a host of them gathered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.3">Of men and women, who the wassailing-building</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.4">The guest-hall begeared. Gold-flashing sparkled</div>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.5">Webs on the walls then, of wonders a many</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.6">To each of the heroes that look on such objects.</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hall is defaced,
however.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.7">The beautiful building was broken to pieces</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.8">Which all within with irons was fastened,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.9">Its hinges torn off: only the roof was</div>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.10">Whole and uninjured when the horrible creature</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.11">Outlawed for evil off had betaken him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.12">Hopeless of living. ’Tis hard to avoid it</div>
<span class="sidenote">[A vague passage
of five verses.]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.13">(Whoever will do it!); but he doubtless must come to<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XVI.FNDEF.2" id="XVI.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.14">The place awaiting, as Wyrd hath appointed,</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.15">Soul-bearers, earth-dwellers, earls under heaven,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.16">Where bound on its bed his body shall slumber</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar goes to
the banquet.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.17">When feasting is finished. Full was the time then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.18">That the son of Healfdene went to the building;</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_36">[36]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.19">The excellent atheling would eat of the banquet.</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.20">Ne’er heard I that people with hero-band larger</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.21">Bare them better tow’rds their bracelet-bestower.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.22">The laden-with-glory stooped to the bench then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.23">(Their kinsmen-companions in plenty were joyful,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.24">Many a cupful quaffing complaisantly),</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.25">Doughty of spirit in the high-tow’ring palace,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar’s
nephew, Hrothulf,
is present.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.26">Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot then inside</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.27">Was filled with friendly ones; falsehood and treachery</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.28">The Folk-Scyldings now nowise did practise.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar lavishes
gifts upon Beowulf.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.29">Then the offspring of Healfdene offered to Beowulf</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.30">A golden standard, as reward for the victory,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.31">A banner embossed, burnie and helmet;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.32">Many men saw then a song-famous weapon</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.33">Borne ’fore the hero. Beowulf drank of</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.34">The cup in the building; that treasure-bestowing</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.35">He needed not blush for in battle-men’s presence.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Four handsomer
gifts were never
presented.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.36">Ne’er heard I that many men on the ale-bench</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.37">In friendlier fashion to their fellows presented</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.38">Four bright jewels with gold-work embellished.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.39">’Round the roof of the helmet a head-guarder outside</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.40">Braided with wires, with bosses was furnished,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.41">That swords-for-the-battle fight-hardened might fail</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.42">Boldly to harm him, when the hero proceeded</div>
<span class="sidenote">Hrothgar commands
that eight
finely caparisoned
steeds be brought
to Beowulf.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.43">Forth against foemen. The defender of earls then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.44">Commanded that eight steeds with bridles</div>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.45">Gold-plated, gleaming, be guided to hallward,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.46">Inside the building; on one of them stood then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.47">An art-broidered saddle embellished with jewels;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.48">’Twas the sovereign’s seat, when the son of King Healfdene</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.49">Was pleased to take part in the play of the edges;</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.50">The famous one’s valor ne’er failed at the front when</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.51">Slain ones were bowing. And to Beowulf granted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.52">The prince of the Ingwins, power over both,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.53">O’er war-steeds and weapons; bade him well to enjoy them.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.54">In so manly a manner the mighty-famed chieftain,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_37">[37]</span>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.55">Hoard-ward of heroes, with horses and jewels</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.56">War-storms requited, that none e’er condemneth</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XVI.57">Who willeth to tell truth with full justice.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XVI.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XVI.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Kl. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hroden</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">háten</span>,’ and renders: <i>Then quickly was
Heorot adorned within, with hands bedecked</i>.—B. suggests ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrætwon</span>’ instead
of ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrætwod</span>,’ and renders: <i>Then was it commanded to adorn Heorot
within quickly with hands</i>.—The former has the advantage of affording a
parallel to ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gefrætwod</span>’: both have the disadvantage of altering the text.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XVI.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XVI.FNREF.2">[2]</a> The passage 1005-1009 seems to be hopeless. One difficult point is to
find a subject for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gesacan</span>.’ Some say ‘he’; others supply ‘each,’ <i>i.e., every
soul-bearer … must gain the inevitable place</i>. The genitives in this case are
partitive.—If ‘he’ be subj., the genitives are dependent on ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gearwe</span>’ (= prepared).—The
‘he’ itself is disputed, some referring it to Grendel; but B.
takes it as involved in the parenthesis.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XVII">
</section></body></html>