<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 23</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.XXIII">XXIII.</a>BEOWULF’S FIGHT WITH GRENDEL’S MOTHER.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf makes a
parting speech to
Hrothgar.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.1">Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s son:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.2">“Recall now, oh, famous kinsman of Healfdene,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.3">Prince very prudent, now to part I am ready,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.4">Gold-friend of earlmen, what erst we agreed on,</div>
<span class="sidenote">If I fail, act as a
kind liegelord to
my thanes,</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.5">Should I lay down my life in lending thee assistance,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.6">When my earth-joys were over, thou wouldst evermore serve me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.7">In stead of a father; my faithful thanemen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.8">My trusty retainers, protect thou and care for,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.9">Fall I in battle: and, Hrothgar belovèd,</div>
<span class="sidenote">and send Higelac
the jewels thou
hast given me</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.10">Send unto Higelac the high-valued jewels</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.11">Thou to me hast allotted. The lord of the Geatmen</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.12">May perceive from the gold, the Hrethling may see it</div>
<span class="sidenote">I should like my
king to know how
generous a lord I
found thee to be.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.13">When he looks on the jewels, that a gem-giver found I</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.14">Good over-measure, enjoyed him while able.</div>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.15">And the ancient heirloom Unferth permit thou,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.16">The famed one to have, the heavy-sword splendid<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.1" id="XXIII.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.17">The hard-edgèd weapon; with Hrunting to aid me,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.18">I shall gain me glory, or grim-death shall take me.”</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf is eager
for the fray.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.19">The atheling of Geatmen uttered these words and</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.20">Heroic did hasten, not any rejoinder</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.21">Was willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowed</div>
<span class="sidenote">He is a whole day
reaching the bottom
of the sea.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.22">The doughty-in-battle. Then a day’s-length elapsed ere</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.23">He was able to see the sea at its bottom.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.24">Early she found then who fifty of winters</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.25">The course of the currents kept in her fury,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.26">Grisly and greedy, that the grim one’s dominion</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_52">[52]</span>
<span class="sidenote">Grendel’s mother
knows that some
one has reached
her domains.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.27">Some one of men from above was exploring.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.28">Forth did she grab them, grappled the warrior</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.29">With horrible clutches; yet no sooner she injured</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.30">His body unscathèd: the burnie out-guarded,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.31">That she proved but powerless to pierce through the armor,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.32">The limb-mail locked, with loath-grabbing fingers.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.33">The sea-wolf bare then, when bottomward came she,</div>
<span class="sidenote">She grabs him,
and bears him to
her den.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.34">The ring-prince homeward, that he after was powerless</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.35">(He had daring to do it) to deal with his weapons,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.36">But many a mere-beast tormented him swimming,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Sea-monsters bite
and strike him.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.37">Flood-beasts no few with fierce-biting tusks did</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.38">Break through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.39">The earl then discovered he was down in some cavern</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.40">Where no water whatever anywise harmed him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.41">And the clutch of the current could come not anear him,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.42">Since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleaming</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.43">Fire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.44">The good one saw then the sea-bottom’s monster,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf attacks
the mother of
Grendel.</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.45">The mighty mere-woman; he made a great onset</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.46">With weapon-of-battle, his hand not desisted</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.47">From striking, that war-blade struck on her head then</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.48">A battle-song greedy. The stranger perceived then</div>
<span class="sidenote">The sword will not
bite.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.49">The sword would not bite, her life would not injure,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.50">But the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.51">Erst had it often onsets encountered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.52">Oft cloven the helmet, the fated one’s armor:</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.53">’Twas the first time that ever the excellent jewel</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.54">Had failed of its fame. Firm-mooded after,</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.55">Not heedless of valor, but mindful of glory,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.56">Was Higelac’s kinsman; the hero-chief angry</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.57">Cast then his carved-sword covered with jewels</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.58">That it lay on the earth, hard and steel-pointed;</div>
<span class="sidenote">The hero throws
down all weapons,
and again trusts
to his hand-grip.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.59">He hoped in his strength, his hand-grapple sturdy.</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.60">So any must act whenever he thinketh</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.61">To gain him in battle glory unending,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.62">And is reckless of living. The lord of the War-Geats</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_53">[53]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.63">(He shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.2" id="XXIII.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.64">The mother of Grendel; then mighty in struggle</div>
<span class="linenum">65</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.65">Swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.66">That she fell to the floor. With furious grapple</div>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf falls.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.67">She gave him requital<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.3" id="XXIII.FNREF.3">3</a></sup> early thereafter,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.68">And stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriors</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.69">Faint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The monster sits
on him with drawn
sword.</span>
<span class="linenum">70</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.70">Foot-going champion. Then she sat on the hall-guest</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.71">And wielded her war-knife wide-bladed, flashing,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.72">For her son would take vengeance, her one only bairn.</div>
<span class="sidenote">His armor saves
his life.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.73">His breast-armor woven bode on his shoulder;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.74">It guarded his life, the entrance defended</div>
<span class="linenum">75</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.75">’Gainst sword-point and edges. Ecgtheow’s son there</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.76">Had fatally journeyed, champion of Geatmen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.77">In the arms of the ocean, had the armor not given,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.78">Close-woven corslet, comfort and succor,</div>
<span class="sidenote">God arranged for
his escape.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.79">And had God most holy not awarded the victory,</div>
<span class="linenum">80</span>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.80">All-knowing Lord; easily did heaven’s</div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.81">Ruler most righteous arrange it with justice;<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#XXIII.FNDEF.4" id="XXIII.FNREF.4">4</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.XXIII.82">Uprose he erect ready for battle.</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.1">[1]</a> Kl. emends ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">wæl-sweord</span>.’ The half-line would then read, ‘<i>the battle-sword
splendid</i>.’—For ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">heard-ecg</span>’ in next half-verse, see note to <a href="#L.XX.39">20 <span class="smaller">39</span></a> above.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Sw., R., and t.B. suggest ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">feaxe</span>’ for ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">eaxle</span>’ (1538) and render: <i>Seized
by the hair</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.3">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.3">[3]</a> If ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">hand-léan</span>’ be accepted (as the MS. has it), the line will read: <i>She
hand-reward gave him early thereafter</i>.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="XXIII.FNDEF.4">
<a href="#XXIII.FNREF.4">[4]</a> Sw. and S. change H.-So.’s semicolon (v<span class="add" title="Added">.</span> 1557) to a comma, and translate:
<i>The Ruler of Heaven arranged it in justice easily, after he arose
again</i>.
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="XXIV">
</section></body></html>