<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="num"><a href="#C.V">V.</a>THE GEATS REACH HEOROT.</h2>
<span class="sidenote">Beowulf courteously
replies.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.1">The chief of the strangers rendered him answer,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.2">War-troopers’ leader, and word-treasure opened:</div>
<span class="sidenote">We are Geats.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.3">“We are sprung from the lineage of the people of Geatland,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.4">And Higelac’s hearth-friends. To heroes unnumbered</div>
<span class="sidenote">My father Ecgtheow
was well-known
in his day.</span>
<span class="linenum">5</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.5">My father was known, a noble head-warrior</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.6">Ecgtheow titled; many a winter</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.7">He lived with the people, ere he passed on his journey,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.8">Old from his dwelling; each of the counsellors</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.9">Widely mid world-folk well remembers him.</div>
<span class="sidenote">Our intentions
towards King
Hrothgar are of the
kindest.</span>
<span class="linenum">10</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.10">We, kindly of spirit, the lord of thy people,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.11">The son of King Healfdene, have come here to visit,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_11">[11]</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.12">Folk-troop’s defender: be free in thy counsels!</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.13">To the noble one bear we a weighty commission,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.14">The helm of the Danemen; we shall hide, I ween,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Is it true that a
monster is slaying
Danish heroes?</span>
<span class="linenum">15</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.15">Naught of our message. Thou know’st if it happen,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.16">As we soothly heard say, that some savage despoiler,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.17">Some hidden pursuer, on nights that are murky</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.18">By deeds very direful ’mid the Danemen exhibits</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.19">Hatred unheard of, horrid destruction</div>
<span class="linenum">20</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.20">And the falling of dead. From feelings least selfish</div>
<span class="sidenote">I can help your
king to free himself
from this horrible
creature.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.21">I am able to render counsel to Hrothgar,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.22">How he, wise and worthy, may worst the destroyer,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.23">If the anguish of sorrow should ever be lessened,<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#V.FNDEF.1" id="V.FNREF.1">1</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.24">Comfort come to him, and care-waves grow cooler,</div>
<span class="linenum">25</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.25">Or ever hereafter he agony suffer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.26">And troublous distress, while towereth upward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.27">The handsomest of houses high on the summit.”</div>
<span class="sidenote">The coast-guard
reminds Beowulf
that it is easier to
say than to do.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.28">Bestriding his stallion, the strand-watchman answered,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.29">The doughty retainer: “The difference surely</div>
<span class="linenum">30</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.30">’Twixt words and works, the warlike shield-bearer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.31">Who judgeth wisely well shall determine.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.32">This band, I hear, beareth no malice</div>
<span class="sidenote">I am satisfied of
your good intentions,
and shall lead
you to the palace.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.33">To the prince of the Scyldings. Pass ye then onward</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.34">With weapons and armor. I shall lead you in person;</div>
<span class="linenum">35</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.35">To my war-trusty vassals command I shall issue</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.36">To keep from all injury your excellent vessel,</div>
<span class="sidenote">Your boat shall be
well cared for during
your stay here.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.37">Your fresh-tarred craft, ’gainst every opposer</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.38">Close by the sea-shore, till the curved-neckèd bark shall</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.39">Waft back again the well-beloved hero</div>
<span class="linenum">40</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.40">O’er the way of the water to Weder dominions.</div>
<span class="sidenote">He again compliments
Beowulf.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.41">To warrior so great ’twill be granted sure</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.42">In the storm of strife to stand secure.”</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.43">Onward they fared then (the vessel lay quiet,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.44">The broad-bosomed bark was bound by its cable,</div>
<span class="pagenum" id="page_12">[12]</span>
<span class="linenum">45</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.45">Firmly at anchor); the boar-signs glistened<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#V.FNDEF.2" id="V.FNREF.2">2</a></sup></div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.46">Bright on the visors vivid with gilding,</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.47">Blaze-hardened, brilliant; the boar acted warden.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.48">The heroes hastened, hurried the liegemen,</div>
<span class="sidenote">The land is perhaps
rolling.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.49">Descended together, till they saw the great palace,</div>
<span class="linenum">50</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.50">The well-fashioned wassail-hall wondrous and gleaming:</div>
<span class="sidenote">Heorot flashes on
their view.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.51">’Mid world-folk and kindreds that was widest reputed</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.52">Of halls under heaven which the hero abode in;</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.53">Its lustre enlightened lands without number.</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.54">Then the battle-brave hero showed them the glittering</div>
<span class="linenum">55</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.55">Court of the bold ones, that they easily thither</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.56">Might fare on their journey; the aforementioned warrior</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.57">Turning his courser, quoth as he left them:</div>
<span class="sidenote">The coast-guard,
having discharged
his duty, bids them
God-speed.</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.58">“’Tis time I were faring; Father Almighty</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.59">Grant you His grace, and give you to journey</div>
<span class="linenum">60</span>
<div class="l" id="L.V.60">Safe on your mission! To the sea I will get me</div>
<div class="l" id="L.V.61">’Gainst hostile warriors as warden to stand.”</div>
<div class="footnotes">
<div class="footnote" id="V.FNDEF.1">
<a href="#V.FNREF.1">[1]</a> ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">Edwendan</span>’ (280) B. takes to be the subs. ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edwenden</span>’ (cf. 1775); and
‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">bisigu</span>’ he takes as gen. sing., limiting ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">edwenden</span>’: <i>If reparation for
sorrows is ever to come</i>. This is supported by t.B.
</div>
<div class="footnote" id="V.FNDEF.2">
<a href="#V.FNREF.2">[2]</a> Combining the emendations of B. and t.B., we may read: <i>The boar-images
glistened … brilliant, protected the life of the war-mooded man</i>. They
read ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">ferh-wearde</span>’ (305) and ‘<span class="ang" lang="ang" xml:lang="ang">gúðmódgum men</span>’ (306).
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="fit" id="VI">
</section></body></html>