<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>List of Words and Phrases Not in General Use</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="editorial-note" epub:type="editorial-note">
			<h2 epub:type="title">List of Words and Phrases Not in General Use</h2>
			<p><i>Atheling.</i>⁠—Prince, nobleman.</p>
			<p>Bairn.⁠—Son, child.</p>
			<p>Barrow.⁠—Mound, rounded hill, funeral-mound.</p>
			<p><i>Battle-sark.</i>⁠—Armor.</p>
			<p>Beaker.⁠—Cup, drinking-vessel.</p>
			<p><i>Begear.⁠</i>—Prepare.</p>
			<p>Bight.⁠—Bay, sea.</p>
			<p><i>Bill.</i>⁠—Sword.</p>
			<p>Boss.⁠—Ornamental projection.</p>
			<p><i>Bracteate.</i>⁠—A round ornament on a necklace.</p>
			<p><i>Brand.⁠</i>—Sword.</p>
			<p><i>Burn.⁠</i>—Stream.</p>
			<p><i>Bernie.⁠</i>—Armor.</p>
			<p><i>Carle.</i>⁠—Man, hero.</p>
			<p>Earl.⁠—Nobleman, any brave man.</p>
			<p>Eke.⁠—Also.</p>
			<p>Emprise.⁠—Enterprise, undertaking.</p>
			<p>Erst.⁠—Formerly.</p>
			<p><i>Erst-worthy.</i>⁠—Worthy for a long time past.</p>
			<p>Fain.⁠—Glad.</p>
			<p>Ferry.⁠—Bear, carry.</p>
			<p>Fey.⁠—Fated, doomed.</p>
			<p><i>Float.⁠</i>—Vessel, ship.</p>
			<p>Foin.⁠—To lunge (Shaks.).</p>
			<p><i>Glory of Kings.</i>⁠—God.</p>
			<p>Grewsome.⁠—Cruel, fierce.</p>
			<p><i>Heft.⁠</i>—Handle, hilt; used by synecdoche for “sword.”</p>
			<p>Helm.⁠—Helmet, protector.</p>
			<p>Henchmen.⁠—Retainer, vassal.</p>
			<p>Hight.⁠—Am (was) named.</p>
			<p><i>Holm.</i>⁠—Ocean, curved surface of the sea.</p>
			<p>Himseemed.⁠—(It) seemed to him.</p>
			<p>Lief.⁠—Dear, valued.</p>
			<p>Mere.⁠—Sea; in compounds, “mere-ways,” “mere-currents,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>Mickle.⁠—Much.</p>
			<p>Nathless.⁠—Nevertheless.</p>
			<p><i>Naze.⁠</i>—Edge (nose).</p>
			<p><i>Ness.</i>⁠—Edge.</p>
			<p><i>Nicker.⁠</i>—Sea-beast.</p>
			<p><i>Quit, quite.⁠</i>—Requite.</p>
			<p>Rathe.⁠—Quickly.</p>
			<p>Reave.⁠—Bereave, deprive.</p>
			<p>Sail-road.⁠—Sea.</p>
			<p>Settle.⁠—Seat, bench.</p>
			<p>Skinker.⁠—One who pours.</p>
			<p>Soothly.⁠—Truly.</p>
			<p>Swinge.⁠—Stroke, blow.</p>
			<p>Targe, target.⁠—Shield.</p>
			<p>Throughly.⁠—Thoroughly.</p>
			<p><i>Told.</i>⁠—Counted.</p>
			<p><i>Uncanny.⁠</i>—Ill-featured, grizzly.</p>
			<p><i>Unnethe.</i>⁠—Difficult.</p>
			<p><i>War-speed.</i>⁠—Success in war.</p>
			<p><i>Web.</i>⁠—Tapestry (that which is “woven”).</p>
			<p><i>Weeded.⁠</i>—Clad (<abbr>cf.</abbr> widow’s weeds).</p>
			<p><i>Ween.⁠</i>—Suppose, imagine.</p>
			<p>Weird.⁠—Fate, Providence.</p>
			<p><i>Whilom.⁠</i>—At times, formerly, often.</p>
			<p><i>Wielder.⁠</i>—Ruler. Often used of God; also in compounds, as “Wielder of Glory,” “Wielder of Worship.”</p>
			<p><i>Wight.</i>⁠—Creature.</p>
			<p><i>Wold.⁠</i>—Plane, extended surface.</p>
			<p>Wot.⁠—Knows.</p>
			<p>Younker.⁠—Youth.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
