<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">


<h2>PREFACE.</h2>
<p>
<span class="sc">The</span> present work is a modest effort to reproduce approximately, in modern
measures, the venerable epic, Beowulf. <i>Approximately</i>, I repeat; for a very
close reproduction of Anglo-Saxon verse would, to a large extent, be prose to
a modern ear.
</p>
<p>
The Heyne-Socin text and glossary have been closely followed. Occasionally
a deviation has been made, but always for what seemed good and sufficient
reason. The translator does not aim to be an editor. Once in a while, however,
he has added a conjecture of his own to the emendations quoted from
the criticisms of other students of the poem.
</p>
<p>
This work is addressed to two classes of readers. From both of these alike
the translator begs sympathy and co-operation. The Anglo-Saxon scholar he
hopes to please by adhering faithfully to the original. The student of English
literature he aims to interest by giving him, in modern garb, the most ancient
epic of our race. This is a bold and venturesome undertaking; and yet there
must be some students of the Teutonic past willing to follow even a daring
guide, if they may read in modern phrases of the sorrows of Hrothgar, of the
prowess of Beowulf, and of the feelings that stirred the hearts of our forefathers
in their primeval homes.
</p>
<p>
In order to please the larger class of readers, a regular cadence has been
used, a measure which, while retaining the essential characteristics of the original,
permits the reader to see ahead of him in reading.
</p>
<p>
Perhaps every Anglo-Saxon scholar has his own theory as to how Beowulf
should be translated. Some have given us prose versions of what we believe
to be a great poem. Is it any reflection on our honored Kemble and Arnold
to say that their translations fail to show a layman that Beowulf is justly called
our first <i>epic</i>? Of those translators who have used verse, several have written
from what would seem a mistaken point of view. Is it proper, for instance,
that the grave and solemn speeches of Beowulf and Hrothgar be put in ballad
measures, tripping lightly and airily along? Or, again, is it fitting that the
rough martial music of Anglo-Saxon verse be interpreted to us in the smooth
measures of modern blank verse? Do we hear what has been beautifully called
“the clanging tread of a warrior in mail”?
</p>
<p>
Of all English translations of Beowulf, that of Professor Garnett alone
gives any adequate idea of the chief characteristics of this great Teutonic
epic.
</p>
<p>
The measure used in the present translation is believed to be as near a
reproduction of the original as modern English affords. The cadences closely
resemble those used by Browning in some of his most striking poems. The
four stresses of the Anglo-Saxon verse are retained, and as much thesis and
anacrusis is allowed as is consistent with a regular cadence. Alliteration has
been used to a large extent; but it was thought that modern ears would hardly
tolerate it on every line. End-rhyme has been used occasionally; internal
rhyme, sporadically. Both have some warrant in Anglo-Saxon poetry. (For
end-rhyme, see <a href="#L.I.53">1 <span class="smaller">53</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.54">1 <span class="smaller">54</span></a>; for internal rhyme, <a href="#L.II.21">2 <span class="smaller">21</span></a>, <a href="#L.VI.40">6 <span class="smaller">40</span></a>.)
</p>
<p>
What Gummere<sup class="footnoteref"><a href="#PREFACE.FNDEF.1" id="PREFACE.FNREF.1" title="Handbook of Poetics, page 175, 1st edition.">1</a></sup> calls the “rime-giver” has been studiously kept; <i>viz.</i>, the
first accented syllable in the second half-verse always carries the alliteration;
and the last accented syllable alliterates only sporadically. Alternate alliteration
is occasionally used as in the original. (See <a href="#L.VII.61">7 <span class="smaller">61</span></a>, <a href="#L.VIII.5">8 <span class="smaller">5</span></a>.)
</p>
<p>
No two accented syllables have been brought together, except occasionally
after a cæsural pause. (See <a href="#L.II.19">2 <span class="smaller">19</span></a> and <a href="#L.XII.1">12 <span class="smaller">1</span></a>.)
Or, scientifically speaking, Sievers’s
C type has been avoided as not consonant with the plan of translation. Several
of his types, however, constantly occur; <i>e.g.</i> A and a variant
(/ x | / x) (/ x x | / x);
B and a variant (x / | x / ) (x x / | x / ); a variant of D (/ x | / x x);
E (/ x x | / ). Anacrusis gives further variety to the types used in the translation.
</p>
<p>
The parallelisms of the original have been faithfully preserved. (<i>E.g.</i>, <a href="#L.I.16">1 <span class="smaller">16</span></a>
and <a href="#L.I.17">1 <span class="smaller">17</span></a>: “Lord” and “Wielder of Glory”; <a href="#L.I.30">1 <span class="smaller">30</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.31">1 <span class="smaller">31</span></a>, <a href="#L.I.32">1 <span class="smaller">32</span></a>; <a href="#L.II.12">2 <span class="smaller">12</span></a> and <a href="#L.II.13">2 <span class="smaller">13</span></a>;
<a href="#L.II.27">2 <span class="smaller">27</span></a> and <a href="#L.II.28">2 <span class="smaller">28</span></a>; <a href="#L.III.5">3 <span class="smaller">5</span></a> and <a href="#L.III.6">3 <span class="smaller">6</span></a>.) Occasionally, some loss has been sustained; but,
on the other hand, a gain has here and there been made.
</p>
<p>
The effort has been made to give a decided flavor of archaism to the translation.
All words not in keeping with the spirit of the poem have been
avoided. Again, though many archaic words have been used, there are none,
it is believed, which are not found in standard modern poetry.
</p>
<p>
With these preliminary remarks, it will not be amiss to give an outline of
the story of the poem.
</p>
</section></body></html>